# CHAPTER 1  Making Sense of Copyright

> Simon Frith and Lee Marshall

The first edition of this book was published more than a decade ago, in 1993. As the original introduction argued, the book reflected growing professional and academic interest in copyright law. Two reasons were suggested for this interest: first, new technologies for the storage and retrieval of knowledge, sounds and images were posing complex problems for legal definitions of work, authorship and use; second, the related globalisation of culture was impelling multinational leisure corporations to seek the 'harmonisation' of copyright regulations across national boundaries. Either way, the legal concept of 'intellectual property' and its financial value had become an issue. For music industry analysts, in particular, a business that had been studied in the 1960s and 1970s as manufacture, producing commodities for sale to consumers, had come to be understood in the 1980s as a service, 'exploiting' musical properties as baskets of rights.

This was not then (and probably is not now) the way in which most people understood a music industry still routinely described as 'the record business', a business dominated by the major 'record labels'. To this day, music business success is measured in record sales, music business problems by record sales decline. Musicians are more likely to celebrate writing a song or releasing a record than 'creating a basket of rights' and, for consumers, copyright law is undoubtedly an arcane and jargon-ridden area of interest. What are 'mechanical' or 'neighbouring' rights? Where is the 'public domain'? What is the difference between 'rights in performance' and 'performance rights'? Between the Berne Convention and the Rome Convention? Who, besides a few record company lawyers, cares?

If it does nothing else, we hope this book explains why you should. For anyone with any interest in music, copyright is vitally important, more important than any other concept in making sense of the variety of social practices that make up 'the music industry'. Copyright provides the framework for every business decision in the industry. Who gets recorded? What do they record? How and where they are marketed? Who is allowed to use their song? Who makes money from this performance? Who is allowed to use their image? Who makes money from that? Will this song be heard on the radio? Used on a TV commercial? Feature in the background of a cinematic film? Can you get a ringtone of your favourite track? Can you arrange it? Sample it? Download it? Copy it for a friend? All these questions concern copyright. Copyright, one might say, is the currency in which all sectors of the industry trade.

Ignoring copyright thus means ignoring one of the key structural features of the music industry and this collection is intended to help students of popular music understand the vital role that copyright plays in what they are studying. This introduction will offer an idiot's guide to copyright terms while later chapters provide both an exploration of key theoretical assumptions and a discussion of how copyright affects everyday musical practices. No prior understanding of copyright is assumed -- indeed, prior ignorance can be quite useful when approaching this topic because the aporias and contradictions of copyright can seem more apparent. As Jessica Litman once put it:

Although writers have suggested that members of the public find the idea of property rights in intangibles [like a piece of music] difficult to accept, there seems to be little evidence that members of the public find the idea of a copyright counterintuitive. Rather, the lay public seems to have a startlingly concrete idea of what copyright is and how it works, which has little to do with actual copyright law. (Litman 1991: 3-4)

At the time Litman was making a mildly ironic point about lawyers' capacity for arrogance and self-delusion. A dozen years later, as the Record Industry Association of America begins legal proceedings against random individuals for downloading tracks using peer-to-peer software (and the British Phonograph Industry threatens to follow the RIAA lead), the remark reads like a prescient and sober warning. There is now an even bigger gap between the lay and professional understanding of copyright as copyright holders dramatically increase its scope. Their remarkable success in lobbying governments for legal change, to put this another way, is due in no small part to the lack of public understanding of what the new laws imply. There is another kind of irony here. Most lay people (not least journalists) believe that digital technology is such a systematic financial threat to record companies and the artists signed to them that the various technological and legal attempts to prevent digital 'theft' have been in vain. In the first edition of this book, for example, most contributors wrote about sampling (the first copyright issue really to interest popular music scholars) as a new kind of composition process which would, in the end, necessitate new definitions of authorship, originality and the public domain. The views of someone like the Turtles' Mark Volman (on being sampled by De La Soul) seemed plainly anachronistic:

'Sampling is just a longer term for theft . . . Anybody who can honestly say sampling is some sort of creativity has never done anything creative.' (quoted in McLeod 2001: 89)

In the event, as Kembrew McLeod notes, by the beginning of the new century sampling was being regulated systematically by the 'old' copyright system, with 'sample clearance houses' emerging, used by both artists and labels to sort out sample licences and fees. By the end of the 1990s nearly all major publishing and recording companies had followed the lead of EMI and employed staff 'whose sole job was to listen to new releases that may have contained samples of its property' (McLeod 2001: 89). Clearing samples had become increasingly expensive and administratively time-consuming, which, in turn, had had a variety of effects on how sample-based music like hiphop is produced. For example:

When Public Enemy wanted to sample a bit of Buffalo Springfield's 'For What It's Worth', the group discovered that it would be cheaper for them to have the song's original vocalist Stephen Stills sing the part of the song they were going to sample.' (McLeod 2001: 94)

The history of sampling suggests another reason why musical copyright is an important issue to understand: the music business was the first sector of the entertainment industry to experience the 'threat' of digital technology, and has therefore been at the forefront of the campaign for new legislation to deal with it. There is a familiar story of unexpected technological consequences here: the industry's adoption of the digital format of CDs in the early 1980s, and its brilliantly successful campaign to persuade consumers to shift from vinyl to CD, can be said to have saved record companies from a serious economic crisis. But in storing music as bits of information, record companies were also undermining the material distinction between production and reproduction (or original and copy) on which copyright law rests. In retrospect it seems technologically inevitable that machines to play CDs would eventually be replaced by machines to play and write CDs, by devices that could retrieve digital-musical information for new uses.[^1] It was for this reason that the Internet (a new means of distributing digital information) was immediately perceived as much more of a threat to record companies than to, say, book publishers or broadcasters, who have been slower in developing their use of digital technology.

These issues will be discussed further in the course of this book, but before laying out our guide to copyright terms, we would like to make one final point about the importance of rhetoric for copyright practice. A common theme of all the chapters here is that the legislative response to digital technology has not only vastly increased the scope of copyright but has also done so in a way which benefits corporate interests at the expense of those of both artists and consumers. What's being described here is a legislative trend that began with the World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO) Convention in Geneva in 1996. Signatories to the international treaties drawn up by the WIPO Convention in Geneva agreed to update their national copyright laws so as to give authors, performers, publishers and record companies the right to authorise and require payment for the distribution of their work on the Internet and other computer networks. The result in the USA was the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) of 1998, which expanded US legislative protection for intellectual property to digital materials, and, in Europe, the EU Copyright Directive of 2001, which became law in the UK at the end of October 2003 as the Copyright and Related Regulations Act.[^2]

There are three points to be made here about these laws. First, the chances are that most readers of this book will not have heard of them -- even readers who are avid music makers and consumers. Copyright is not normally taken to be a topic of political or public interest. It is rarely written about in newspapers or featured in policy debate. This means, second, that the rationale of copyright laws and why they matter tends to be determined by the interest of the corporate lobbyists who have driven the legislative changes of the last decade.[^3] Our third point follows: while the corporate argument is framed as 'bringing copyright law into line with the new environment' (which is, indeed, a common sense thing to do), from an academic perspective what has actually happened is that the original principles of copyright have been surreptitiously put aside. A system that was originally framed by reference to the public good - it involved restrictions on the monopoly power of rights owners - has become a means of promoting private interests. What was once a system for ensuring public access to knowledge has now become a system, at least in the digital sphere, to prevent it - most obviously in the clauses making it illegal to attempt to circumvent electronic access controls even when accessing non-copyright material.[^4] The 'burden' of copyright law has been transferred from rights owner to rights user: whereas once the rights holder had to persuade a court that an 'unauthorized' use of their work actually damaged them, now the 'illegal' user has to persuade a court that there is some specific reason to excuse their breach. Who would have thought ten years ago, when the first edition of this book came out, that in 2003 US music consumers would be being prosecuted for how they used their computers in the privacy of their own homes?[^5]

The questions discussed in this book, then, are neither arcane nor irrelevant to everyday life, and it is particularly important to understand copyright in terms that are not simply derived from rights owners' property claims but also consider the broader effects of copyright on creativity and the social circulation of ideas. In the course of an extensive investigation of the present state of US copyright law for the Atlantic Monthly, Charles C. Mann came to the conclusion that "rampant musical piracy may hurt musicians less than they fear. The real threat – to listeners and, conceivably, democracy itself – is the music industry's reaction to it" (Mann 2000). Such a threat, as is described in later chapters in this book, has a number of components, but two seem paramount.

On the one hand, recent legislation seems to extend the notion of copyright from getting paid for usage to controlling usage, thus raising questions about copyright as a means of censorship, a restraint on creativity, a way of restricting the supply of music, and so on. While music industry lobbyists rhetorically involve artists in their anti-downloading campaigns, they cannot always disguise the tensions between composers and performers who want their works exposed as widely as possible (and who, like Janis Ian, see the Internet as a wonderful tool for promotion of their music) and record companies and publishers who want to keep tight control of their markets. In the words of Lawrence Lessig, copyright is 'not speaking for those who create, but those who hold massive amounts of copyright'.[^6]

On the other hand, recent legislation seems to elevate the fact of copying above either the intentions of the copier or the effects of the copy. One of the recurring themes of this book (as of most criticism of recent copyright legislation) is that the notion of 'fair use' – once essential to the copyright attempt to balance the interests of the authors and users of a work – has been systematically marginalised. This is the context in which Siva Vaidhyanathan, one of the most prominent academic critics of the DMCA, wrote as follows:

We make a grave mistake when we choose to engage in discussion of copyright in terms of 'property'. Copyright is not about 'property' as commonly understood. It is a specific state-granted monopoly issued for particular policy reasons. While, technically, it describes real property as well, it also describes a more fundamental public good that precedes specific policy choices the state may make about the regulation and dispensation of property. But we can't win an argument as long as those who hold inordinate interest in copyright maximisation can cry 'theft!' at any mention of fair use or users' rights. (Vaidhyanathan 2002: 5)

Vaidhyanathan goes on to call for academics to play a more active part in encouraging public debate about copyright issues. But, alas, if this is a field where conceptual clarity is called for above all, it is also a field in which such clarity is very hard to attain.

# What is copyright?

If there is one thing upon which copyright scholars can agree, it is that copyright is very complex, and it can seem particularly mysterious to those approaching it from a non-legal background. In this section, we will outline some of its most important characteristics. Our approach here is descriptive and does not offer justifications or criticisms; these will emerge in later chapters.[^7] Indeed, it is perhaps advisable to read this section alongside the chapters in the first section of the book.

'Copyright' is a noun not a verb, a thing rather than an action: you cannot 'copyright something' (Litman 1991: 39). However, although copyright is a thing, its existence depends upon the existence of a work that is eligible for copyright. For this reason, copyright is said to subsist rather than exist. If a person writes a song (known in copyright law as a 'work', as are any other creations), then the song exists and the copyright of the song subsists in the song, but the copyright cannot exist without the song itself. It is extremely important to distinguish between the work and the copyright of the work - they are not the same thing. If you buy a CD, then you own the physical disc and the recordings of the musical works on it. You can listen to the works, lend the CD to your friends, write rude comments all over the sleeve notes or use it as a Frisbee. You own the thing as a material, physical object. You cannot, however, copy it because you do not own the copyright to the work. (And here is the first complication: these days you can, of course, copy it - 'burn' its content onto a blank CD - but this usage, unlike the others, has to be 'authorised').

Although we talk of copyright as a singular thing, it is actually generally understood in law as a 'bundle of rights'. If a work is eligible for copyright, then the copyright owner is permitted to do a number of different things with the work which are not permitted to those who do not own the copyright (unless they have been licensed by the rights holder). The most obvious of these rights is the right to copy, but there are others. In general, copyright provides the rights holder with the exclusive rights to:

- copy the work  
- make adaptations of the work (or prepare derivative works) [^8]
- issue copies of the work to the public  
- perform the work in public  
- broadcast or send a cable transmission of the work.[^9]

Exclusivity is extremely important to note here. No-one but the right-holder is allowed to do these things without prior authorisation (not even the author if he is not the rights-holder). So far so straightforward. The complications begin with the nature of the 'work' at issue. Copyright was initially invented to protect literary works (the first copyright act – known as the Statute of Anne – became English law in 1710). Copyright protection for musical compositions developed later – in 1831 in the US and 1842 in the UK. When copyright was initially granted to music compositions, the definition of what counted as 'music' was fairly straightforward: it referred to the written score (that which can be printed). Following the invention of the phonograph, however, 'music' became more and more associated with the recorded song and copyright law has attempted to come to terms with this while still centring its focus on the composed work (this is discussed in more detail in Chapter 7). The chronological history of copyright remains the best framework for understanding the various rights that are now involved.

To begin with there is a song (or composition). The first owners of the copyright in a song are its creator, the people (or person) who wrote it.[^10] Because they have the exclusive rights described above (by virtue of being the copyright owner, not by virtue of being the author), they also have the exclusive rights to permit other people to do these 'restricted' acts, and in most cases (because they want their works to be known to the public and to make money from them) authors and composers will turn to other people to help them exploit their rights.[^11] They can either assign (usually by selling) their rights to a third party or license them to particular people to do specific restricted acts. There are numerous complications here simply in terms of the number of parties who may be involved – licensed or assigned, the rights to do different things to and with the work, in different territories, for different periods of time (the increasing range of uses to which music may be put is described further in Chapter 10). In practice, though, rights are often licensed collectively. In Britain composers thus assign their performance and broadcasting rights to a single agency, the Performing Right Society (PRS), which handles all the further negotiations involved in licensing the work's performances (collecting societies are discussed further in Chapter 6).

One right which can be assigned by the first copyright owner (following the development of sound recording) is the right to record the work, which is known as the mechanical right. In the UK composers usually assign their mechanical rights to the Mechanical Copyright Protection Society (MCPS) which, in its own words, 'negotiates agreements with those who wish to record music, collects the mechanical royalties (on record sales, for example) and then distributes them to the correct copyright owner'. Over the course of the twentieth century the recording of a work (rather than its publication in sheet music form) became the usual way in which a work reached the public and a composer's most valuable right (except, perhaps, for classical composers), but it also led to a new kind of exploitation, as first broadcasters, then film makers and juke box owners began to use records (rather than live musicians) for public entertainment. A new kind of musical copyright was created, a right related to the original composition but subsisting in the recording itself rather than the underlying musical work. This neighbouring right is usually owned not by the composer but by the company that organises and publishes the recording (in legal terms, known as the producer). The owner of this right has the exclusive rights to cause the recording to be heard in public, to broadcast the recording (by whatever means – including, now, the Internet), and to make another recording embodying this recording or any part of it (this is where the problem of sampling arises, but it also involves 'dubbing rights' and 'synchronisation rights', the use of recordings or extracts from recording on film soundtracks, advertisements, and so on). In Britain record companies usually assign these rights to Phonographic Performance Limited (PPL).

The distinction between copyright and neighbouring rights is an important one, not least because they are intended to benefit different parties (though in practice this may not be the case). They also last for different periods of time (offer different terms of protection in legal parlance): in most industrialised countries copyright lasts for seventy years after the death of the author; neighbouring rights last for a finite period from the date a recording is published which, though substantial (ninety-five years now in the USA), is still likely to be less than that of the copyrights involved.

One further type of right needs mentioning in this context: performers' rights (which can be distinguished from performance rights). Performance rights relate to the exclusive rights of a rights-owner to perform his song in public. Any kind of public performance by anyone except the right-owner has to be licensed (these are the licenses administered in the UK by the Performing Right Society). Performers' rights refer to the rights all the musicians involved have in the performance itself. The UK has provided some form of performers' rights since 1925, though they were significantly strengthened by the 1988 Copyright Act (Sherrard 1992: 57). The US had no performers' rights at all until 1994, when a new act to prevent bootlegging was introduced (making it illegal to record a performance without the explicit permission of the performer) (Deas 1998). But the most significant extension to performers rights can be found in the EC Rental Directive that the UK government adopted at the end of 1996. This was designed to ensure that everyone involved in a recording (the session musicians as well as the 'featured' musicians) should benefit when that recording was licensed for broadcast use (on a soundtrack, for example). In effect this means that income previously distributed (by PPL) between record companies and the featured artists now has to be distributed between record companies, featured artists and non-featured performers, a change which makes little difference to a self-sustained band like U2 but involves a new and rather intricate division of the pie for, say, an orchestral recording. Whether or not this has actually benefitted the musicians now entitled to some sort of financial return from the broadcast of their work, given the administrative costs involved and the rewriting of employment contracts, is open to question (this is discussed further in Chapter 7).

There are quite significant differences between the ways in which the various rights described here are defined in different countries (traditionally, until the DMCA, the USA had a much more restricted definition of the neighbouring rights in a recording than the UK, for example) and these are discussed further in the next chapter, but one further right does need to be described here. In the civil law approach to copyright originating in France and the norm in continental Europe, authors and composers have a moral right (droit moral) in their work. (Moral rights only became a part of UK law in the 1988 Copyright Act, as an effect of its membership of the European Union, and are not recognised as such in US law.) Unlike other elements of copyright, moral rights are inalienable: they cannot be assigned to another party (though they can be waived). In Britain the moral rights available to an author include most significantly:

- The paternity right (droit à la paternite) – the right to be identified as the author of a work. (There is also a right not to have a work falsely attributed to oneself as an author.)

- The right of integrity (droit à l'intégrité) – the right to object to the 'derogatory' treatment of the work, to its alteration in any way which is 'a distortion or mutilation of the work or is otherwise prejudicial to the honour or reputation of the author'.

In continental law authors also have a publication right (droit de divulgation) – the right to determine when and whether a work shall be published; and a withdrawal right (droit de retrait) – the right to withdraw or modify a work already published.

# Copyright Problems

We hope that this brief description of the types of rights existing under the general label of 'copyright' indicates both the complexity of the area and the significance of copyright for the institutional structure of the contemporary music industry. Take an average compilation CD as an example of how the system works. It includes the cover art (itself a copyrightable work), maybe some sleeve notes (a copyrightable literary work), a number of tracks written by different songwriters (some written by more than one person) and sung by different singers (some with a known band, some using session musicians). It is possible that this one disc has upwards of sixty different rights interests (and many more if samples are involved), something indicated by the ever-lengthening small print on the CD package.[^12]

But in outlining here the basic terms involved in copyright we also need to draw attention to some of the conceptual problems that are taken for granted in copyright discussions but are not always explicitly acknowledged. It usually goes without saying, for example, that not all works are eligible for copyright. The most significant criterion for claiming copyright in the first place is that a work must be original. In copyright terms, original merely means that the work has not been copied from elsewhere (that is, that the author is the originator of the work) and does not refer to any intrinsic, aesthetic quality (even the most banal 'formulaic' songs are eligible for copyright as long as they have not been copied). Technically, this means that two individuals could independently write exactly the same song and both would qualify for copyright because both would be 'original'. Neither could be said to have copied the other; neither would be benefiting from the other's skill or labour. (Thus in many plagiarism cases the argument before the court is not whether song A sounds like song B but whether songwriter A had heard the work of songwriter B before writing his or her composition.)

The criteria for originality were initially devised to prevent publishers from claiming copyright in ancient works, and this is where the concept of public domain comes into play. A work is in the public domain when no-one can claim exclusive rights to its use. This will happen either when the term or period of protection has come to an end (more than seventy years have passed since its author's death) or when there is no author who can claim to be its originator (because it was composed anonymously, collectively, as part of a 'folk' process).[^13] But the prominence of the idea of originality within copyright discourse also reflects particular conceptions of authorship that have developed in Western modernity (the conceptions that inform the idea of an author's moral right). This has created particular problems for traditional musicians, as discussed in Anthony Seeger's chapter (the issue here is not that a work is too old to copyright or even that composition is collective but that the continuing process of recreation is not understood in terms of the Romantic artist). And even in the West the argument that copyright is a way of acknowledging the value of artistic creativity is not as straightforward as it may seem.[^14] Encouraging authorship is one of the central justifications for copyright, but, on the other hand, authors are usually in a very weak position to exploit their own rights. As authors they may be the first owners of copyright in a work but they are almost entirely reliant on other agencies to publish, reproduce and distribute their work to the public, and their bargaining position with publishers and record labels is not strong. In order to get any financial return from their work, they have to cede many of their rights in it to management companies, publishers, and record labels. To put this another way, the history of music is a history of composers and artists, as well as their rights, being exploited.

A second issue that arises here is how best to discuss copyright as an overarching concept while simultaneously acknowledging the many differences between copyright regimes both legally and socially in different countries. The protection of literary works evolved relatively independently in many states in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries (see Chapter 2) and different power relations and ideologies resulted in a great many local variations in who and what was protected and how (different countries had very different policies on the copyright protection to be afforded to foreign authors, for example). Similarly, popular music industries in different countries have developed their own idiosyncrasies. CD rental, for example, has a role in the Japanese industry that would not be legally possible elsewhere, while in the USA the strength of the radio lobby has always managed to prevent the development of the kinds of neighbouring rights in recordings long acknowledged in Europe.

Is it possible, then, to develop an analysis that uses both 'copyright' and 'the music industry' as general concepts while facilitating a nuanced understanding of local variations? Twenty years ago, the answer would probably have been no. Even in the first edition of this book, ten years ago, chapters were organised on a country by country basis. In this volume, though, we have asked authors to approach copyright thematically, taking evidence from more than one country while paying attention to the particularity of national situations. We believe, in fact, that today it would be difficult to analyse the copyright situation in any one country without reference to global developments, to the ways in which different national copyright systems are beginning to be 'harmonised'. Developments within media industries over the last twenty to thirty years have resulted in increasingly transnational legal structures; local actors now find themselves in very similar situations. Indeed, one purpose of this book is to draw attention to how such transnational developments in copyright law are affecting our everyday musical lives at the local level, for good or ill (see Chapters 4 and 6).

The music industry has always been an international industry, of course, and historically the main way that interested parties have sought to deal with local differences in copyright law has been through multinational treaties binding signatory countries to an agreed set of minimum standards of rights protection. The first such copyright treaty was the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, which was established, mainly by authors and artists, in 1886, and which has been revised a number of times since. The Berne Convention concerned the protection of literary and artistic expressions that were fixed in a tangible form (such as books and sheet music-performances are not protected through this convention); protection was to be granted by member states for a minimum period of fifty years after the death of the author. Among other things the Convention also mandated moral rights for artists (which was the main reason for the USA not signing up to Berne until over 100 years after its inception).

Berne protected musical works, but not sound recordings and so in Rome in 1961 an additional agreement, The International Convention for the Protection of Performers, Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting Organisations, was established to help prevent the international piracy of sound recordings. The Rome Convention, as it is known, protects sound recordings in signatory countries for a minimum of twenty years and offers some limited protection to performers. Again, however, the USA did not sign the agreement; this time because it did not recognise performers' rights. The slightly curious situation arose, therefore, that the world's largest exporter of copyrighted works, including sound recordings, was not a signatory to either of the major international treaties relevant to copyright in the music industry. If nothing else, this suggests that copyright may not be as necessary for music business activities as is often suggested.

This situation changed, anyway, in the 1990s as part of a dramatic paradigm shift in international copyright regulation which has seen copyright become embedded within a wider network of trade relations and not just subject to specific copyright conventions such as Berne and Rome. The most significant development in this context was the TRIPs agreement of 1993. TRIPs (an acronym for Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property) is part of GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade), the central plank of the global market economy, and the TRIPs agreement significantly strengthened protection for copyright by not only establishing minimum levels of protection, but also, perhaps even more importantly, establishing minimum levels of enforcement. TRIPs thus incorporates many of the substantive provisions of Berne and Rome (though increasing the minimum protection of sound recordings from twenty to fifty years) while making available new kinds of sanction against countries which do not sufficiently police copyright law. Crucially, by embedding copyright into a trade agreement, TRIPs makes it possible for net copyright exporters (such as the UK and US) to impose cross-sectoral trade sanctions on those countries which fail to enforce copyright protection (over the last ten years various countries – such as the Ukraine, India and China – have been threatened with such action). TRIPs also means that many more countries are now bound to protect copyright than were signatories to Berne or Rome. There are currently 146 members of the World Trade Organisation (WTO), the body established to liberalise trade, which binds members to GATT. Thus today national music industries with many different histories come under the same copyright regulations, and are threatened with similar international sanctions (such as export bans) if they do not enforce Western-style copyright protection in their own domains.

It would be easy to conclude from the sort of arguments we've been making here that copyright is (and has always been) the dynamic driving the music industry; that what the industry does (music publishing, record making, rights management and so on) is determined by what the law allows it to do. And it is certainly the case that lawyers have a prominent role in everyday music business and that the courts are routinely involved in adjudicating music industry disputes (rather more so than in other businesses – see Frith 2002 and Chapter 6 in this book). But this would be a misleading conclusion, nonetheless. As the chapters that follow explain, the legal concept of copyright has been shaped by music industry practice and, in particular, by the distribution of music industry power, as much as it has shaped them. If individual music companies have to ensure that what they do is lawful, the music industry devotes much of its energy as an industry to seeking to change the law – in ceaseless lobbying of Congress, the EU, the WTO and so on. In recent years, as we noted at the beginning of this chapter, it has been remarkably successful, which is to confirm our point that copyright has to be understood as a political construct as well as a legal principle. Or, perhaps it would be more accurate to say that as a legal principle copyright is a political construct – with economic causes and consequences.

One problem for academic studies of copyright (particularly for economists - see Chapter 3) is that while it is easy to explain why copyrights are valuable for the music industry in general terms, it is extremely difficult to document how much the different rights in a particular work are worth, or how the flow of income works. One can show clearly enough, that is to say, that the value of copyrights determines certain sorts of market decision (following the development of talkies, for example, it paid Hollywood studios to buy up music publishers in order to ensure a supply of musical content, just as it paid Sony to buy CBS fifty years later to ensure a supply of film and music and TV content for the new era of home entertainment). But it is all but impossible to discover the financial return to all the rights holders involved in licensing all the uses of the tracks on, say, Dido's *Life for Rent*, or to track where all the money made by these tracks goes. (Remember too, that they can go on earning income for at least another ninety-five years and possibly several decades longer.) Part of the problem here is that the industry is nowadays so structured that much of the flow of copyright income is internal to one company - in accounting terms, record company payments of mechanical rights fees to publishers, and television company payments of neighbouring right fees to record companies, may simply mean moving figures from one part of a corporate balance sheet to another. Indeed, one economic consequence of copyright seems to be to encourage, under certain technological conditions, the merger of content producing (or rights owning) and content (or rights) using companies (leading to the emergence of a rights oligopoly). The former companies are thus able to ensure not only exposure for their works but fee income; the latter are able to ensure a supply of content at a reasonable rate. Such synergy makes good sense to the companies concerned; it is less clear that it benefits either the consumer or the artist; and it is certain that it is impossible to get at the figures which would show who is really earning what from the copyright system.

# The structure of this volume

As editors, what most surprised us about the following chapters was the recurring scepticism expressed about the benefits of copyright. We asked people to write about copyright using different disciplinary approaches and from the perspective of different positions in the industry; we were not trying to develop any specific kind of copyright 'line'. Yet many of the authors involved concluded that the current copyright regime was of limited benefit to the musical practitioners they describe. We hope that what follows illuminates the complexity and the interest of the issues involved, both in the range of questions covered and in the ways in which different chapters overlap. We haven't attempted to edit out some of the more obvious examples of repetition – the various discussions of 'fair use', for example. The cumulative effect is to clarify the issues involved and to draw attention to the most prominent arguments currently engaging popular music scholars.

We have divided these chapters into two sections. We feel that it is impossible to understand current copyright issues in the music industry without an understanding of the historical processes which have led us to where we are. The three chapters in Part I thus describe the conceptual and historical background to contemporary copyright discourse. Martin Kretschmer and Friedemann Kawohl provide a comprehensive guide to development of the idea of copyright as a kind of property, intellectual property, since its origins in eighteenth-century European political and legal thought. Ruth Towse examines in detail the economic arguments for (and against) copyright, again taking a broad historical overview, while Dave Laing focuses on the politics of copyright or, to be more specific, on the way in which the various music business interests have shaped (and been shaped by) the international copyright framework over the last 200 years. Between them, these three essays should help readers understand the legal structure in which everyday musical practices now take place but note the assumption being made here: we've organised this part of the book on the principle that law is best understood as an effect of philosophical and economic thought, the result of economic and political power struggles, rather than developing as a legal doctrine sui generis.

This should be borne in mind when reading the second part of the book, which collects together chapters on how copyright is experienced by different music business practitioners, for whom the law certainly is materially present, sometimes as a defence against exploitation, more often it seems as a constraint on what they can do, as producers or consumers. Firstly, Steve Greenfield and Guy Osborn describe the reasons why copyright disputes reach the courts, giving judges an unusual influence on record business practice, and also discuss how power relationships within the music industry affect the distribution of copyright rights. Roger Wallis considers the place of composers in 'the music industry value chain', and the dilemmas facing the national collecting societies established to administer their rights as the music industry is increasingly organised globally. Jason Toynbee and Paul Théberge reflect on the ways in which copyright provides a misleading account of musical creativity. Their arguments overlap, though Toynbee's derives from a historical sociological account of popular musical production, while Théberge's rests on an account of how digital technology has affected recent music-making practices in the studio. For both writers the problem of copyright law is that it assumes that music is a kind of object (a work, a score, a thing) that it long since ceased to be. Anthony Seeger looks at the way in which Western copyright law not only fails to make sense in other kinds of music culture but also denies traditional musicians moral or financial control of the use of their works by Western entrepreneurs. Finally, Simon Frith considers the ways in which copyright affects media uses of music and its casual consumption, and Lee Marshall 'is concerned with those people who ignore or disregard copyright in their daily lives'.

As we have already mentioned, all the writers here describe the ways in which the present copyright system restricts rather than encourages creativity; limits rather than supports musical activity. There is no consensus, though, on what should be done about this. Some of the authors imply that copyright law will just have to change because in its present shape it is becoming irrelevant. Others propose specific legal changes that need to be brought about by political campaigns. Others still seem more fatalistic, suggesting that the present system reflects political and economic realities that we, musicians and consumers alike, will have to live with. We return to the question of the future of copyright at the end of the book.

# Notes

[^1]: This was certainly an unanticipated consequence. Janis Ian remembers the head of Sony marketing explicitly enthusing that 'CDs were uncopyable' when persuading her to license her record, Between the Lines, in CD format (at a reduced royalty rate). See Janis Ian: 'A freedom that works: the upside of download', available among other places on www.openDemocracy.net, downloaded 31 July, 2002.  

[^2]: We should also mention in this context the Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act of 1998, which extended the term of copyright protection in the USA from fifty years after the death of the author to seventy years (as in Europe) and the term of copyright protection of the work of 'corporate creators' from seventy-five to ninety-five years.  

[^3]: This is not to say that corporate media content providers were the only lobbyists concerned. Media access providers such as Internet servers, computer equipment manufacturers and telecommunications companies had their own interest in increasing the consumer demand for downloading devices and in avoiding prosecution for the consumer 'misuse' of their equipment. But the lack of much media coverage of or political argument about the WIPO treaties or EU Directives or even Congressional hearings does suggest that digital copyright regulation has been shaped primarily by corporate argument.  

[^4]: On 27 October 2003, the New York Times reported that students at MIT were developing a version of peer-to-peer music sharing that would distribute tracks via the university's analog campus cable system. This would be legal as analog technology is not regulated as rigorously as digital technology is. (John Schwartz: 'With Cable TV at M.I.T., Who Needs Napster?' Thanks to Peter Meech for this reference.)  

[^5]: In its 20 August 2003 issue, the American satirical magazine, The Onion, published its response to the hype surrounding the iPod. Under the headline 'I Have An iPod – In My Mind!', Ted Lascowitcz wrote that 'I can call up any song I've ever heard, any time I want. And I never have to load software or change batteries. There are no firewire cords or docks to mess with. I just put my hands behind my head, lean back, and select a tune from the extensive music-library folder inside my brain.' After absorbing the endless anti-theft messages from the RIAA, it's impossible to read this without thinking immediately of the ways in which publishers will seek to do something about such an appallingly unregulated use of their properties. (Thanks to Alfred Archer for this reference.)  

[^6]: Quoted in Karlin Lillington, 'Sentries at the gate', Guardian Online, 20 December 2001, p. 3.  

[^7]: What follows is indebted to Carey and Verow (1997).  

[^8]: A derivative work is a new work that incorporates aspects of a pre-existing work. Translations, screenplays based on novels and abridgements are all examples of derivative works. A new artistic creation could also be a derivative work. For example, painting a moustache on an image of the Mona Lisa creates a new work but one that is derived from an earlier work, as is a rap record that utilises samples.  

[^9]: This list is taken from the 1988 Copyright Designs and Patents Act. As already discussed these provisions have now been extended to cover digital/Internet transmission.

[^10]: There are some exceptions to this. If a work is commissioned, then the copyright is vested in the person or company who did the commissioning; similarly if a work is produced as a normal part of employment then its copyright is vested with the employer. Arguments about who owns the copyright in such situations can be complicated (and will be affected by the nature of the contracts between the parties) – disputes about who owns the rights to advertising jingles regularly reach the courts, for example. In 1999, using this ‘work for hire’ principle the American recording industry attempted to amend US copyright act so that all recordings made under contract were classified as work for hire, but this did not succeed. Their model was the Hollywood studio system – as film studios initiate and fund films they own their copyright. Record companies argued that they were working in a similar way.  

[^11]: One feature of digital distribution is that it makes it easier for 'first owners' to reach a public without third party help.  

[^12]: Example taken from Cornish (2000: 11-12).  

[^13]: It is quite common in plagiarism cases for a defendant to claim that the plaintiffs did not in fact 'originate' the song at issue but simply lifted a melody from the public domain. They could therefore not claim any exclusive rights in it.  

[^14]: One further complication here is the nature of collective authorship or collaboration. How should rights premised on the author be assigned when the creation of a work was a group process?

# References

Carey, P. and Verow, R. (1997), Media and Entertainment Law, Bristol: Jordans.  
Cornish, G. (2000), Understand Copyright in a Week, London: Hodder and Stoughton.  
Deas, S. (1998), 'Jazzing up the Copyright Act? Resolving the uncertainties of the United States anti-bootlegging law', Hastings Communications and Entertainment Law Journal 20 (3): 567-637.  
Frith, S. (2002), 'Illegality and the music industry' in M. Talbot (ed.) The Business of Music, Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 195-216.  
Litman, J. (1991), 'Copyright as myth', paper presented to conference on 'Intellectual Property and the Construction of Authorship', Case Western Reserve University, 19-21 April.  
McLeod, K. (2001), Owning Culture. Authorship, Ownership, and Intellectual Property, New York: Peter Lang.  
Mann, C. C. (2000), 'The heavenly jukebox', *Atlantic Monthly*, September. http://theatlantic.com/issues/2000/og/mann.htm  
Sherrard, B. (1992), 'Performer's protection: the evolution of a complete offence', Entertainment Law Review 3 (2): 57-63.  
Vaidhyanathan, S. (2002), 'Copyright as cudgel', Chronicle of Higher Education, 2 August. http://chronicle.com/free/v48/i47/47b00701.htm