
> Edited by SIMON FRITH and LEE MARSHALL

# CHAPTER 1  Making Sense of Copyright

> Simon Frith and Lee Marshall

The first edition of this book was published more than a decade ago, in 1993. As the original introduction argued, the book reflected growing professional and academic interest in copyright law. Two reasons were suggested for this interest: first, new technologies for the storage and retrieval of knowledge, sounds and images were posing complex problems for legal definitions of work, authorship and use; second, the related globalisation of culture was impelling multinational leisure corporations to seek the 'harmonisation' of copyright regulations across national boundaries. Either way, the legal concept of 'intellectual property' and its financial value had become an issue. For music industry analysts, in particular, a business that had been studied in the 1960s and 1970s as manufacture, producing commodities for sale to consumers, had come to be understood in the 1980s as a service, 'exploiting' musical properties as baskets of rights.

This was not then (and probably is not now) the way in which most people understood a music industry still routinely described as 'the record business', a business dominated by the major 'record labels'. To this day, music business success is measured in record sales, music business problems by record sales decline. Musicians are more likely to celebrate writing a song or releasing a record than 'creating a basket of rights' and, for consumers, copyright law is undoubtedly an arcane and jargon-ridden area of interest. What are 'mechanical' or 'neighbouring' rights? Where is the 'public domain'? What is the difference between 'rights in performance' and 'performance rights'? Between the Berne Convention and the Rome Convention? Who, besides a few record company lawyers, cares?

If it does nothing else, we hope this book explains why you should. For anyone with any interest in music, copyright is vitally important, more important than any other concept in making sense of the variety of social practices that make up 'the music industry'. Copyright provides the framework for every business decision in the industry. Who gets recorded? What do they record? How and where they are marketed? Who is allowed to use their song? Who makes money from this performance? Who is allowed to use their image? Who makes money from that? Will this song be heard on the radio? Used on a TV commercial? Feature in the background of a cinematic film? Can you get a ringtone of your favourite track? Can you arrange it? Sample it? Download it? Copy it for a friend? All these questions concern copyright. Copyright, one might say, is the currency in which all sectors of the industry trade.

Ignoring copyright thus means ignoring one of the key structural features of the music industry and this collection is intended to help students of popular music understand the vital role that copyright plays in what they are studying. This introduction will offer an idiot's guide to copyright terms while later chapters provide both an exploration of key theoretical assumptions and a discussion of how copyright affects everyday musical practices. No prior understanding of copyright is assumed -- indeed, prior ignorance can be quite useful when approaching this topic because the aporias and contradictions of copyright can seem more apparent. As Jessica Litman once put it:

Although writers have suggested that members of the public find the idea of property rights in intangibles [like a piece of music] difficult to accept, there seems to be little evidence that members of the public find the idea of a copyright counterintuitive. Rather, the lay public seems to have a startlingly concrete idea of what copyright is and how it works, which has little to do with actual copyright law. (Litman 1991: 3-4)

At the time Litman was making a mildly ironic point about lawyers' capacity for arrogance and self-delusion. A dozen years later, as the Record Industry Association of America begins legal proceedings against random individuals for downloading tracks using peer-to-peer software (and the British Phonograph Industry threatens to follow the RIAA lead), the remark reads like a prescient and sober warning. There is now an even bigger gap between the lay and professional understanding of copyright as copyright holders dramatically increase its scope. Their remarkable success in lobbying governments for legal change, to put this another way, is due in no small part to the lack of public understanding of what the new laws imply. There is another kind of irony here. Most lay people (not least journalists) believe that digital technology is such a systematic financial threat to record companies and the artists signed to them that the various technological and legal attempts to prevent digital 'theft' have been in vain. In the first edition of this book, for example, most contributors wrote about sampling (the first copyright issue really to interest popular music scholars) as a new kind of composition process which would, in the end, necessitate new definitions of authorship, originality and the public domain. The views of someone like the Turtles' Mark Volman (on being sampled by De La Soul) seemed plainly anachronistic:

'Sampling is just a longer term for theft . . . Anybody who can honestly say sampling is some sort of creativity has never done anything creative.' (quoted in McLeod 2001: 89)

In the event, as Kembrew McLeod notes, by the beginning of the new century sampling was being regulated systematically by the 'old' copyright system, with 'sample clearance houses' emerging, used by both artists and labels to sort out sample licences and fees. By the end of the 1990s nearly all major publishing and recording companies had followed the lead of EMI and employed staff 'whose sole job was to listen to new releases that may have contained samples of its property' (McLeod 2001: 89). Clearing samples had become increasingly expensive and administratively time-consuming, which, in turn, had had a variety of effects on how sample-based music like hiphop is produced. For example:

When Public Enemy wanted to sample a bit of Buffalo Springfield's 'For What It's Worth', the group discovered that it would be cheaper for them to have the song's original vocalist Stephen Stills sing the part of the song they were going to sample.' (McLeod 2001: 94)

The history of sampling suggests another reason why musical copyright is an important issue to understand: the music business was the first sector of the entertainment industry to experience the 'threat' of digital technology, and has therefore been at the forefront of the campaign for new legislation to deal with it. There is a familiar story of unexpected technological consequences here: the industry's adoption of the digital format of CDs in the early 1980s, and its brilliantly successful campaign to persuade consumers to shift from vinyl to CD, can be said to have saved record companies from a serious economic crisis. But in storing music as bits of information, record companies were also undermining the material distinction between production and reproduction (or original and copy) on which copyright law rests. In retrospect it seems technologically inevitable that machines to play CDs would eventually be replaced by machines to play and write CDs, by devices that could retrieve digital-musical information for new uses.[^1-1] It was for this reason that the Internet (a new means of distributing digital information) was immediately perceived as much more of a threat to record companies than to, say, book publishers or broadcasters, who have been slower in developing their use of digital technology.

These issues will be discussed further in the course of this book, but before laying out our guide to copyright terms, we would like to make one final point about the importance of rhetoric for copyright practice. A common theme of all the chapters here is that the legislative response to digital technology has not only vastly increased the scope of copyright but has also done so in a way which benefits corporate interests at the expense of those of both artists and consumers. What's being described here is a legislative trend that began with the World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO) Convention in Geneva in 1996. Signatories to the international treaties drawn up by the WIPO Convention in Geneva agreed to update their national copyright laws so as to give authors, performers, publishers and record companies the right to authorise and require payment for the distribution of their work on the Internet and other computer networks. The result in the USA was the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) of 1998, which expanded US legislative protection for intellectual property to digital materials, and, in Europe, the EU Copyright Directive of 2001, which became law in the UK at the end of October 2003 as the Copyright and Related Regulations Act.[^1-2]

There are three points to be made here about these laws. First, the chances are that most readers of this book will not have heard of them -- even readers who are avid music makers and consumers. Copyright is not normally taken to be a topic of political or public interest. It is rarely written about in newspapers or featured in policy debate. This means, second, that the rationale of copyright laws and why they matter tends to be determined by the interest of the corporate lobbyists who have driven the legislative changes of the last decade.[^1-3] Our third point follows: while the corporate argument is framed as 'bringing copyright law into line with the new environment' (which is, indeed, a common sense thing to do), from an academic perspective what has actually happened is that the original principles of copyright have been surreptitiously put aside. A system that was originally framed by reference to the public good - it involved restrictions on the monopoly power of rights owners - has become a means of promoting private interests. What was once a system for ensuring public access to knowledge has now become a system, at least in the digital sphere, to prevent it - most obviously in the clauses making it illegal to attempt to circumvent electronic access controls even when accessing non-copyright material.[^1-4] The 'burden' of copyright law has been transferred from rights owner to rights user: whereas once the rights holder had to persuade a court that an 'unauthorized' use of their work actually damaged them, now the 'illegal' user has to persuade a court that there is some specific reason to excuse their breach. Who would have thought ten years ago, when the first edition of this book came out, that in 2003 US music consumers would be being prosecuted for how they used their computers in the privacy of their own homes?[^1-5]

The questions discussed in this book, then, are neither arcane nor irrelevant to everyday life, and it is particularly important to understand copyright in terms that are not simply derived from rights owners' property claims but also consider the broader effects of copyright on creativity and the social circulation of ideas. In the course of an extensive investigation of the present state of US copyright law for the Atlantic Monthly, Charles C. Mann came to the conclusion that "rampant musical piracy may hurt musicians less than they fear. The real threat – to listeners and, conceivably, democracy itself – is the music industry's reaction to it" (Mann 2000). Such a threat, as is described in later chapters in this book, has a number of components, but two seem paramount.

On the one hand, recent legislation seems to extend the notion of copyright from getting paid for usage to controlling usage, thus raising questions about copyright as a means of censorship, a restraint on creativity, a way of restricting the supply of music, and so on. While music industry lobbyists rhetorically involve artists in their anti-downloading campaigns, they cannot always disguise the tensions between composers and performers who want their works exposed as widely as possible (and who, like Janis Ian, see the Internet as a wonderful tool for promotion of their music) and record companies and publishers who want to keep tight control of their markets. In the words of Lawrence Lessig, copyright is 'not speaking for those who create, but those who hold massive amounts of copyright'.[^1-6]

On the other hand, recent legislation seems to elevate the fact of copying above either the intentions of the copier or the effects of the copy. One of the recurring themes of this book (as of most criticism of recent copyright legislation) is that the notion of 'fair use' – once essential to the copyright attempt to balance the interests of the authors and users of a work – has been systematically marginalised. This is the context in which Siva Vaidhyanathan, one of the most prominent academic critics of the DMCA, wrote as follows:

We make a grave mistake when we choose to engage in discussion of copyright in terms of 'property'. Copyright is not about 'property' as commonly understood. It is a specific state-granted monopoly issued for particular policy reasons. While, technically, it describes real property as well, it also describes a more fundamental public good that precedes specific policy choices the state may make about the regulation and dispensation of property. But we can't win an argument as long as those who hold inordinate interest in copyright maximisation can cry 'theft!' at any mention of fair use or users' rights. (Vaidhyanathan 2002: 5)

Vaidhyanathan goes on to call for academics to play a more active part in encouraging public debate about copyright issues. But, alas, if this is a field where conceptual clarity is called for above all, it is also a field in which such clarity is very hard to attain.

## What is copyright?

If there is one thing upon which copyright scholars can agree, it is that copyright is very complex, and it can seem particularly mysterious to those approaching it from a non-legal background. In this section, we will outline some of its most important characteristics. Our approach here is descriptive and does not offer justifications or criticisms; these will emerge in later chapters.[^1-7] Indeed, it is perhaps advisable to read this section alongside the chapters in the first section of the book.

'Copyright' is a noun not a verb, a thing rather than an action: you cannot 'copyright something' (Litman 1991: 39). However, although copyright is a thing, its existence depends upon the existence of a work that is eligible for copyright. For this reason, copyright is said to subsist rather than exist. If a person writes a song (known in copyright law as a 'work', as are any other creations), then the song exists and the copyright of the song subsists in the song, but the copyright cannot exist without the song itself. It is extremely important to distinguish between the work and the copyright of the work - they are not the same thing. If you buy a CD, then you own the physical disc and the recordings of the musical works on it. You can listen to the works, lend the CD to your friends, write rude comments all over the sleeve notes or use it as a Frisbee. You own the thing as a material, physical object. You cannot, however, copy it because you do not own the copyright to the work. (And here is the first complication: these days you can, of course, copy it - 'burn' its content onto a blank CD - but this usage, unlike the others, has to be 'authorised').

Although we talk of copyright as a singular thing, it is actually generally understood in law as a 'bundle of rights'. If a work is eligible for copyright, then the copyright owner is permitted to do a number of different things with the work which are not permitted to those who do not own the copyright (unless they have been licensed by the rights holder). The most obvious of these rights is the right to copy, but there are others. In general, copyright provides the rights holder with the exclusive rights to:

- copy the work  
- make adaptations of the work (or prepare derivative works) [^1-8]
- issue copies of the work to the public  
- perform the work in public  
- broadcast or send a cable transmission of the work.[^1-9]

Exclusivity is extremely important to note here. No-one but the right-holder is allowed to do these things without prior authorisation (not even the author if he is not the rights-holder). So far so straightforward. The complications begin with the nature of the 'work' at issue. Copyright was initially invented to protect literary works (the first copyright act – known as the Statute of Anne – became English law in 1710). Copyright protection for musical compositions developed later – in 1831 in the US and 1842 in the UK. When copyright was initially granted to music compositions, the definition of what counted as 'music' was fairly straightforward: it referred to the written score (that which can be printed). Following the invention of the phonograph, however, 'music' became more and more associated with the recorded song and copyright law has attempted to come to terms with this while still centring its focus on the composed work (this is discussed in more detail in Chapter 7). The chronological history of copyright remains the best framework for understanding the various rights that are now involved.

To begin with there is a song (or composition). The first owners of the copyright in a song are its creator, the people (or person) who wrote it.[^1-10] Because they have the exclusive rights described above (by virtue of being the copyright owner, not by virtue of being the author), they also have the exclusive rights to permit other people to do these 'restricted' acts, and in most cases (because they want their works to be known to the public and to make money from them) authors and composers will turn to other people to help them exploit their rights.[^1-11] They can either assign (usually by selling) their rights to a third party or license them to particular people to do specific restricted acts. There are numerous complications here simply in terms of the number of parties who may be involved – licensed or assigned, the rights to do different things to and with the work, in different territories, for different periods of time (the increasing range of uses to which music may be put is described further in Chapter 10). In practice, though, rights are often licensed collectively. In Britain composers thus assign their performance and broadcasting rights to a single agency, the Performing Right Society (PRS), which handles all the further negotiations involved in licensing the work's performances (collecting societies are discussed further in Chapter 6).

One right which can be assigned by the first copyright owner (following the development of sound recording) is the right to record the work, which is known as the mechanical right. In the UK composers usually assign their mechanical rights to the Mechanical Copyright Protection Society (MCPS) which, in its own words, 'negotiates agreements with those who wish to record music, collects the mechanical royalties (on record sales, for example) and then distributes them to the correct copyright owner'. Over the course of the twentieth century the recording of a work (rather than its publication in sheet music form) became the usual way in which a work reached the public and a composer's most valuable right (except, perhaps, for classical composers), but it also led to a new kind of exploitation, as first broadcasters, then film makers and juke box owners began to use records (rather than live musicians) for public entertainment. A new kind of musical copyright was created, a right related to the original composition but subsisting in the recording itself rather than the underlying musical work. This neighbouring right is usually owned not by the composer but by the company that organises and publishes the recording (in legal terms, known as the producer). The owner of this right has the exclusive rights to cause the recording to be heard in public, to broadcast the recording (by whatever means – including, now, the Internet), and to make another recording embodying this recording or any part of it (this is where the problem of sampling arises, but it also involves 'dubbing rights' and 'synchronisation rights', the use of recordings or extracts from recording on film soundtracks, advertisements, and so on). In Britain record companies usually assign these rights to Phonographic Performance Limited (PPL).

The distinction between copyright and neighbouring rights is an important one, not least because they are intended to benefit different parties (though in practice this may not be the case). They also last for different periods of time (offer different terms of protection in legal parlance): in most industrialised countries copyright lasts for seventy years after the death of the author; neighbouring rights last for a finite period from the date a recording is published which, though substantial (ninety-five years now in the USA), is still likely to be less than that of the copyrights involved.

One further type of right needs mentioning in this context: performers' rights (which can be distinguished from performance rights). Performance rights relate to the exclusive rights of a rights-owner to perform his song in public. Any kind of public performance by anyone except the right-owner has to be licensed (these are the licenses administered in the UK by the Performing Right Society). Performers' rights refer to the rights all the musicians involved have in the performance itself. The UK has provided some form of performers' rights since 1925, though they were significantly strengthened by the 1988 Copyright Act (Sherrard 1992: 57). The US had no performers' rights at all until 1994, when a new act to prevent bootlegging was introduced (making it illegal to record a performance without the explicit permission of the performer) (Deas 1998). But the most significant extension to performers rights can be found in the EC Rental Directive that the UK government adopted at the end of 1996. This was designed to ensure that everyone involved in a recording (the session musicians as well as the 'featured' musicians) should benefit when that recording was licensed for broadcast use (on a soundtrack, for example). In effect this means that income previously distributed (by PPL) between record companies and the featured artists now has to be distributed between record companies, featured artists and non-featured performers, a change which makes little difference to a self-sustained band like U2 but involves a new and rather intricate division of the pie for, say, an orchestral recording. Whether or not this has actually benefitted the musicians now entitled to some sort of financial return from the broadcast of their work, given the administrative costs involved and the rewriting of employment contracts, is open to question (this is discussed further in Chapter 7).

There are quite significant differences between the ways in which the various rights described here are defined in different countries (traditionally, until the DMCA, the USA had a much more restricted definition of the neighbouring rights in a recording than the UK, for example) and these are discussed further in the next chapter, but one further right does need to be described here. In the civil law approach to copyright originating in France and the norm in continental Europe, authors and composers have a moral right (droit moral) in their work. (Moral rights only became a part of UK law in the 1988 Copyright Act, as an effect of its membership of the European Union, and are not recognised as such in US law.) Unlike other elements of copyright, moral rights are inalienable: they cannot be assigned to another party (though they can be waived). In Britain the moral rights available to an author include most significantly:

- The paternity right (droit à la paternite) – the right to be identified as the author of a work. (There is also a right not to have a work falsely attributed to oneself as an author.)

- The right of integrity (droit à l'intégrité) – the right to object to the 'derogatory' treatment of the work, to its alteration in any way which is 'a distortion or mutilation of the work or is otherwise prejudicial to the honour or reputation of the author'.

In continental law authors also have a publication right (droit de divulgation) – the right to determine when and whether a work shall be published; and a withdrawal right (droit de retrait) – the right to withdraw or modify a work already published.

## Copyright Problems

We hope that this brief description of the types of rights existing under the general label of 'copyright' indicates both the complexity of the area and the significance of copyright for the institutional structure of the contemporary music industry. Take an average compilation CD as an example of how the system works. It includes the cover art (itself a copyrightable work), maybe some sleeve notes (a copyrightable literary work), a number of tracks written by different songwriters (some written by more than one person) and sung by different singers (some with a known band, some using session musicians). It is possible that this one disc has upwards of sixty different rights interests (and many more if samples are involved), something indicated by the ever-lengthening small print on the CD package.[^1-12]

But in outlining here the basic terms involved in copyright we also need to draw attention to some of the conceptual problems that are taken for granted in copyright discussions but are not always explicitly acknowledged. It usually goes without saying, for example, that not all works are eligible for copyright. The most significant criterion for claiming copyright in the first place is that a work must be original. In copyright terms, original merely means that the work has not been copied from elsewhere (that is, that the author is the originator of the work) and does not refer to any intrinsic, aesthetic quality (even the most banal 'formulaic' songs are eligible for copyright as long as they have not been copied). Technically, this means that two individuals could independently write exactly the same song and both would qualify for copyright because both would be 'original'. Neither could be said to have copied the other; neither would be benefiting from the other's skill or labour. (Thus in many plagiarism cases the argument before the court is not whether song A sounds like song B but whether songwriter A had heard the work of songwriter B before writing his or her composition.)

The criteria for originality were initially devised to prevent publishers from claiming copyright in ancient works, and this is where the concept of public domain comes into play. A work is in the public domain when no-one can claim exclusive rights to its use. This will happen either when the term or period of protection has come to an end (more than seventy years have passed since its author's death) or when there is no author who can claim to be its originator (because it was composed anonymously, collectively, as part of a 'folk' process).[^1-13] But the prominence of the idea of originality within copyright discourse also reflects particular conceptions of authorship that have developed in Western modernity (the conceptions that inform the idea of an author's moral right). This has created particular problems for traditional musicians, as discussed in Anthony Seeger's chapter (the issue here is not that a work is too old to copyright or even that composition is collective but that the continuing process of recreation is not understood in terms of the Romantic artist). And even in the West the argument that copyright is a way of acknowledging the value of artistic creativity is not as straightforward as it may seem.[^1-14] Encouraging authorship is one of the central justifications for copyright, but, on the other hand, authors are usually in a very weak position to exploit their own rights. As authors they may be the first owners of copyright in a work but they are almost entirely reliant on other agencies to publish, reproduce and distribute their work to the public, and their bargaining position with publishers and record labels is not strong. In order to get any financial return from their work, they have to cede many of their rights in it to management companies, publishers, and record labels. To put this another way, the history of music is a history of composers and artists, as well as their rights, being exploited.

A second issue that arises here is how best to discuss copyright as an overarching concept while simultaneously acknowledging the many differences between copyright regimes both legally and socially in different countries. The protection of literary works evolved relatively independently in many states in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries (see Chapter 2) and different power relations and ideologies resulted in a great many local variations in who and what was protected and how (different countries had very different policies on the copyright protection to be afforded to foreign authors, for example). Similarly, popular music industries in different countries have developed their own idiosyncrasies. CD rental, for example, has a role in the Japanese industry that would not be legally possible elsewhere, while in the USA the strength of the radio lobby has always managed to prevent the development of the kinds of neighbouring rights in recordings long acknowledged in Europe.

Is it possible, then, to develop an analysis that uses both 'copyright' and 'the music industry' as general concepts while facilitating a nuanced understanding of local variations? Twenty years ago, the answer would probably have been no. Even in the first edition of this book, ten years ago, chapters were organised on a country by country basis. In this volume, though, we have asked authors to approach copyright thematically, taking evidence from more than one country while paying attention to the particularity of national situations. We believe, in fact, that today it would be difficult to analyse the copyright situation in any one country without reference to global developments, to the ways in which different national copyright systems are beginning to be 'harmonised'. Developments within media industries over the last twenty to thirty years have resulted in increasingly transnational legal structures; local actors now find themselves in very similar situations. Indeed, one purpose of this book is to draw attention to how such transnational developments in copyright law are affecting our everyday musical lives at the local level, for good or ill (see Chapters 4 and 6).

The music industry has always been an international industry, of course, and historically the main way that interested parties have sought to deal with local differences in copyright law has been through multinational treaties binding signatory countries to an agreed set of minimum standards of rights protection. The first such copyright treaty was the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works, which was established, mainly by authors and artists, in 1886, and which has been revised a number of times since. The Berne Convention concerned the protection of literary and artistic expressions that were fixed in a tangible form (such as books and sheet music-performances are not protected through this convention); protection was to be granted by member states for a minimum period of fifty years after the death of the author. Among other things the Convention also mandated moral rights for artists (which was the main reason for the USA not signing up to Berne until over 100 years after its inception).

Berne protected musical works, but not sound recordings and so in Rome in 1961 an additional agreement, The International Convention for the Protection of Performers, Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting Organisations, was established to help prevent the international piracy of sound recordings. The Rome Convention, as it is known, protects sound recordings in signatory countries for a minimum of twenty years and offers some limited protection to performers. Again, however, the USA did not sign the agreement; this time because it did not recognise performers' rights. The slightly curious situation arose, therefore, that the world's largest exporter of copyrighted works, including sound recordings, was not a signatory to either of the major international treaties relevant to copyright in the music industry. If nothing else, this suggests that copyright may not be as necessary for music business activities as is often suggested.

This situation changed, anyway, in the 1990s as part of a dramatic paradigm shift in international copyright regulation which has seen copyright become embedded within a wider network of trade relations and not just subject to specific copyright conventions such as Berne and Rome. The most significant development in this context was the TRIPs agreement of 1993. TRIPs (an acronym for Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property) is part of GATT (General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade), the central plank of the global market economy, and the TRIPs agreement significantly strengthened protection for copyright by not only establishing minimum levels of protection, but also, perhaps even more importantly, establishing minimum levels of enforcement. TRIPs thus incorporates many of the substantive provisions of Berne and Rome (though increasing the minimum protection of sound recordings from twenty to fifty years) while making available new kinds of sanction against countries which do not sufficiently police copyright law. Crucially, by embedding copyright into a trade agreement, TRIPs makes it possible for net copyright exporters (such as the UK and US) to impose cross-sectoral trade sanctions on those countries which fail to enforce copyright protection (over the last ten years various countries – such as the Ukraine, India and China – have been threatened with such action). TRIPs also means that many more countries are now bound to protect copyright than were signatories to Berne or Rome. There are currently 146 members of the World Trade Organisation (WTO), the body established to liberalise trade, which binds members to GATT. Thus today national music industries with many different histories come under the same copyright regulations, and are threatened with similar international sanctions (such as export bans) if they do not enforce Western-style copyright protection in their own domains.

It would be easy to conclude from the sort of arguments we've been making here that copyright is (and has always been) the dynamic driving the music industry; that what the industry does (music publishing, record making, rights management and so on) is determined by what the law allows it to do. And it is certainly the case that lawyers have a prominent role in everyday music business and that the courts are routinely involved in adjudicating music industry disputes (rather more so than in other businesses – see Frith 2002 and Chapter 6 in this book). But this would be a misleading conclusion, nonetheless. As the chapters that follow explain, the legal concept of copyright has been shaped by music industry practice and, in particular, by the distribution of music industry power, as much as it has shaped them. If individual music companies have to ensure that what they do is lawful, the music industry devotes much of its energy as an industry to seeking to change the law – in ceaseless lobbying of Congress, the EU, the WTO and so on. In recent years, as we noted at the beginning of this chapter, it has been remarkably successful, which is to confirm our point that copyright has to be understood as a political construct as well as a legal principle. Or, perhaps it would be more accurate to say that as a legal principle copyright is a political construct – with economic causes and consequences.

One problem for academic studies of copyright (particularly for economists - see Chapter 3) is that while it is easy to explain why copyrights are valuable for the music industry in general terms, it is extremely difficult to document how much the different rights in a particular work are worth, or how the flow of income works. One can show clearly enough, that is to say, that the value of copyrights determines certain sorts of market decision (following the development of talkies, for example, it paid Hollywood studios to buy up music publishers in order to ensure a supply of musical content, just as it paid Sony to buy CBS fifty years later to ensure a supply of film and music and TV content for the new era of home entertainment). But it is all but impossible to discover the financial return to all the rights holders involved in licensing all the uses of the tracks on, say, Dido's *Life for Rent*, or to track where all the money made by these tracks goes. (Remember too, that they can go on earning income for at least another ninety-five years and possibly several decades longer.) Part of the problem here is that the industry is nowadays so structured that much of the flow of copyright income is internal to one company - in accounting terms, record company payments of mechanical rights fees to publishers, and television company payments of neighbouring right fees to record companies, may simply mean moving figures from one part of a corporate balance sheet to another. Indeed, one economic consequence of copyright seems to be to encourage, under certain technological conditions, the merger of content producing (or rights owning) and content (or rights) using companies (leading to the emergence of a rights oligopoly). The former companies are thus able to ensure not only exposure for their works but fee income; the latter are able to ensure a supply of content at a reasonable rate. Such synergy makes good sense to the companies concerned; it is less clear that it benefits either the consumer or the artist; and it is certain that it is impossible to get at the figures which would show who is really earning what from the copyright system.

## The structure of this volume

As editors, what most surprised us about the following chapters was the recurring scepticism expressed about the benefits of copyright. We asked people to write about copyright using different disciplinary approaches and from the perspective of different positions in the industry; we were not trying to develop any specific kind of copyright 'line'. Yet many of the authors involved concluded that the current copyright regime was of limited benefit to the musical practitioners they describe. We hope that what follows illuminates the complexity and the interest of the issues involved, both in the range of questions covered and in the ways in which different chapters overlap. We haven't attempted to edit out some of the more obvious examples of repetition – the various discussions of 'fair use', for example. The cumulative effect is to clarify the issues involved and to draw attention to the most prominent arguments currently engaging popular music scholars.

We have divided these chapters into two sections. We feel that it is impossible to understand current copyright issues in the music industry without an understanding of the historical processes which have led us to where we are. The three chapters in Part I thus describe the conceptual and historical background to contemporary copyright discourse. Martin Kretschmer and Friedemann Kawohl provide a comprehensive guide to development of the idea of copyright as a kind of property, intellectual property, since its origins in eighteenth-century European political and legal thought. Ruth Towse examines in detail the economic arguments for (and against) copyright, again taking a broad historical overview, while Dave Laing focuses on the politics of copyright or, to be more specific, on the way in which the various music business interests have shaped (and been shaped by) the international copyright framework over the last 200 years. Between them, these three essays should help readers understand the legal structure in which everyday musical practices now take place but note the assumption being made here: we've organised this part of the book on the principle that law is best understood as an effect of philosophical and economic thought, the result of economic and political power struggles, rather than developing as a legal doctrine sui generis.

This should be borne in mind when reading the second part of the book, which collects together chapters on how copyright is experienced by different music business practitioners, for whom the law certainly is materially present, sometimes as a defence against exploitation, more often it seems as a constraint on what they can do, as producers or consumers. Firstly, Steve Greenfield and Guy Osborn describe the reasons why copyright disputes reach the courts, giving judges an unusual influence on record business practice, and also discuss how power relationships within the music industry affect the distribution of copyright rights. Roger Wallis considers the place of composers in 'the music industry value chain', and the dilemmas facing the national collecting societies established to administer their rights as the music industry is increasingly organised globally. Jason Toynbee and Paul Théberge reflect on the ways in which copyright provides a misleading account of musical creativity. Their arguments overlap, though Toynbee's derives from a historical sociological account of popular musical production, while Théberge's rests on an account of how digital technology has affected recent music-making practices in the studio. For both writers the problem of copyright law is that it assumes that music is a kind of object (a work, a score, a thing) that it long since ceased to be. Anthony Seeger looks at the way in which Western copyright law not only fails to make sense in other kinds of music culture but also denies traditional musicians moral or financial control of the use of their works by Western entrepreneurs. Finally, Simon Frith considers the ways in which copyright affects media uses of music and its casual consumption, and Lee Marshall 'is concerned with those people who ignore or disregard copyright in their daily lives'.

As we have already mentioned, all the writers here describe the ways in which the present copyright system restricts rather than encourages creativity; limits rather than supports musical activity. There is no consensus, though, on what should be done about this. Some of the authors imply that copyright law will just have to change because in its present shape it is becoming irrelevant. Others propose specific legal changes that need to be brought about by political campaigns. Others still seem more fatalistic, suggesting that the present system reflects political and economic realities that we, musicians and consumers alike, will have to live with. We return to the question of the future of copyright at the end of the book.

## Notes

[^1-1]: This was certainly an unanticipated consequence. Janis Ian remembers the head of Sony marketing explicitly enthusing that 'CDs were uncopyable' when persuading her to license her record, Between the Lines, in CD format (at a reduced royalty rate). See Janis Ian: 'A freedom that works: the upside of download', available among other places on www.openDemocracy.net, downloaded 31 July, 2002.  

[^1-2]: We should also mention in this context the Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act of 1998, which extended the term of copyright protection in the USA from fifty years after the death of the author to seventy years (as in Europe) and the term of copyright protection of the work of 'corporate creators' from seventy-five to ninety-five years.  

[^1-3]: This is not to say that corporate media content providers were the only lobbyists concerned. Media access providers such as Internet servers, computer equipment manufacturers and telecommunications companies had their own interest in increasing the consumer demand for downloading devices and in avoiding prosecution for the consumer 'misuse' of their equipment. But the lack of much media coverage of or political argument about the WIPO treaties or EU Directives or even Congressional hearings does suggest that digital copyright regulation has been shaped primarily by corporate argument.  

[^1-4]: On 27 October 2003, the New York Times reported that students at MIT were developing a version of peer-to-peer music sharing that would distribute tracks via the university's analog campus cable system. This would be legal as analog technology is not regulated as rigorously as digital technology is. (John Schwartz: 'With Cable TV at M.I.T., Who Needs Napster?' Thanks to Peter Meech for this reference.)  

[^1-5]: In its 20 August 2003 issue, the American satirical magazine, The Onion, published its response to the hype surrounding the iPod. Under the headline 'I Have An iPod – In My Mind!', Ted Lascowitcz wrote that 'I can call up any song I've ever heard, any time I want. And I never have to load software or change batteries. There are no firewire cords or docks to mess with. I just put my hands behind my head, lean back, and select a tune from the extensive music-library folder inside my brain.' After absorbing the endless anti-theft messages from the RIAA, it's impossible to read this without thinking immediately of the ways in which publishers will seek to do something about such an appallingly unregulated use of their properties. (Thanks to Alfred Archer for this reference.)  

[^1-6]: Quoted in Karlin Lillington, 'Sentries at the gate', Guardian Online, 20 December 2001, p. 3.  

[^1-7]: What follows is indebted to Carey and Verow (1997).  

[^1-8]: A derivative work is a new work that incorporates aspects of a pre-existing work. Translations, screenplays based on novels and abridgements are all examples of derivative works. A new artistic creation could also be a derivative work. For example, painting a moustache on an image of the Mona Lisa creates a new work but one that is derived from an earlier work, as is a rap record that utilises samples.  

[^1-9]: This list is taken from the 1988 Copyright Designs and Patents Act. As already discussed these provisions have now been extended to cover digital/Internet transmission.

[^1-10]: There are some exceptions to this. If a work is commissioned, then the copyright is vested in the person or company who did the commissioning; similarly if a work is produced as a normal part of employment then its copyright is vested with the employer. Arguments about who owns the copyright in such situations can be complicated (and will be affected by the nature of the contracts between the parties) – disputes about who owns the rights to advertising jingles regularly reach the courts, for example. In 1999, using this ‘work for hire’ principle the American recording industry attempted to amend US copyright act so that all recordings made under contract were classified as work for hire, but this did not succeed. Their model was the Hollywood studio system – as film studios initiate and fund films they own their copyright. Record companies argued that they were working in a similar way.  

[^1-11]: One feature of digital distribution is that it makes it easier for 'first owners' to reach a public without third party help.  

[^1-12]: Example taken from Cornish (2000: 11-12).  

[^1-13]: It is quite common in plagiarism cases for a defendant to claim that the plaintiffs did not in fact 'originate' the song at issue but simply lifted a melody from the public domain. They could therefore not claim any exclusive rights in it.  

[^1-14]: One further complication here is the nature of collective authorship or collaboration. How should rights premised on the author be assigned when the creation of a work was a group process?

## References

- Carey, P. and Verow, R. (1997), Media and Entertainment Law, Bristol: Jordans.  
- Cornish, G. (2000), Understand Copyright in a Week, London: Hodder and Stoughton.  
- Deas, S. (1998), 'Jazzing up the Copyright Act? Resolving the uncertainties of the United States anti-bootlegging law', Hastings Communications and Entertainment Law Journal 20 (3): 567-637.  
- Frith, S. (2002), 'Illegality and the music industry' in M. Talbot (ed.) The Business of Music, Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 195-216.  
- Litman, J. (1991), 'Copyright as myth', paper presented to conference on 'Intellectual Property and the Construction of Authorship', Case Western Reserve University, 19-21 April.  
- McLeod, K. (2001), Owning Culture. Authorship, Ownership, and Intellectual Property, New York: Peter Lang.  
- Mann, C. C. (2000), 'The heavenly jukebox', *Atlantic Monthly*, September. http://theatlantic.com/issues/2000/og/mann.htm  
- Sherrard, B. (1992), 'Performer's protection: the evolution of a complete offence', Entertainment Law Review 3 (2): 57-63.  
- Vaidhyanathan, S. (2002), 'Copyright as cudgel', Chronicle of Higher Education, 2 August. http://chronicle.com/free/v48/i47/47b00701.htm

# CHAPTER 2  The History and Philosophy of Copyright[^2-1]

> Martin Kretschmer and Friedemann Kawohl

## Introduction

In modern legal parlance, copyright has become subsumed under a concept of intellectual property. This appears to evoke the justificatory package of individual property rights that has shaped Western societies since John Locke's Second Treatise of Government (1690). Legitimising private ownership in the wake of the Glorious Revolution of 1688, Locke proposed that by 'mixing' labour with previously common goods a new 'private dominion' would be created.

Characteristic of the property approach are exclusivity (that is, the right to deny use by third parties of the intellectual territory claimed) and transferability (that is, the right to transfer title of the intellectual territory freely to third parties).[^2-2] Trespassing on intellectual territory (unauthorised copying) has been condemned with the property term 'piracy' since the eighteenth century.[^2-3] The Eighth Commandment, 'Thou shalt not steal' is still cited as a 'sacred principle' behind the provisions of modern copyright law (Laddie 1997: 2).[^2-4]

In this chapter, we suggest that the concept of property is not very helpful in determining the appropriate regulatory policy for the creation and distribution of culture. Property is that to which protection is afforded, not vice versa. In the case of copyright, it has been said that without the artificial scarcity introduced by property concepts, the costs of production of creative works will remain above the costs of copying. Creative production therefore would not take place.[^2-5] However, this argument from the utility of property provisions is implausible for a copyright term that is calculated from the life of the author (plus fifty to seventy years), and for a copyright scope that prevents desirable cultural engagement, for example, in adaptation and sampling.

If there is another, independent (non-regulatory) moral argument for copyright, it is problematic. We shall argue that norms of authorship do not support claims to a private, exclusive, transferable domain of intellectual property; rather they justify an informational link between creator and creative products, and perhaps a claim to rewards from unauthorised exploitation of such products.

The chapter is structured around the key evolutionary phases of the modern copyright paradigm: 

(1) the proto-copyright of crown privileges and letter patents, responding to the invention of the printing press since the late 1400s; 

(2) the eighteenth-century Battle of the Booksellers, eventually asserting copyright as a limited incentive in the production and dissemination of cultural products; 

(3) the parallel development of author norm towards the end of the eighteenth century, associated primarily with the philosophers of German Idealism; 

(4) the nineteenth-century statutory construction of abstract works to which all acts of exploitations refer, fusing the property concept of utilitarian incentives with restrictions derived from the author (culminating in the Berne Convention).

The justificatory arguments for music copyright are generally similar to those for other literary or artistic creations. Initially copyright mechanisms evolved for the predominant technology of book printing, with music being denied statutory protection until 1777. This changed with the early nineteenth century, when music became a trend setter in defining abstract work identity through the newly restricted acts of public performance and adaptation. The focus of the chapter is on the four jurisdictions that have shaped modern copyright: Britain, Germany, France and the United States.

## Proto-copyright: crown privileges and letter patents

During the period dubbed the Renaissance by historians in the nineteenth century, several factors combined to turn copyright into a legal issue. The first factor was the emergence of a sense of individualism (realised in the art of Italian painters and sculptors). The second factor was a period of rapid economic expansion carried by a new class of international merchants. Commerce became organised around annual trade fairs which created an efficient distribution structure for new ideas (Epstein 1998). In turn, the merchants themselves created a market of people with surplus income and demand for leisure goods. The third factor was the invention (around 1450) of a technology enabling the fast and efficient reproduction of ideas: Gutenberg's printing press. These elements were in place by the end of the fifteenth century, when an estimated 20 million books were circulating in Europe (Eisenstein 1979).

Reprints of popular books were soon pervasive, but the late medieval states had a ready-made device for controlling the dissemination of new ideas while solving the profitability problem of some printers: the Crown privilege. Awarding monopoly rights against a fee was the defining economic instrument of late feudalism (cf. North and Thomas 1973). Early printing privileges are documented in Venice (1469), Milan (1480s), Germany (1501) and France (1507) (Pohlmann 1962). In England, the first book printed with a privilege from the sovereign was published in 1518 (Patterson 1968). The earliest known privilege for exclusive rights to print and sell music was granted on 25 May 1498 by the Venetian signoria to Ottaviano dei Petrucci, for a term of twenty years (Puttlingen 2001: 141).

Typically, Crown privileges were issued to printers, either individually or collectively, mostly for a limited period of time, sometimes for specific books only. There are also many examples of privileges obtained by individual creators with court connections. The two systems operated in parallel.

In Germany, we find letters patent protecting the work of authors and composers on a common law basis from around 1500. The first known imperial patent to a composer was Maximilian's privilege for Arnold Schlick (1511). A prominent example was the protection afforded to Orlande de Lassus (1532-94) who collected privileges in various jurisdictions (France 1575; Germany 1581). Privileges were influential at the Frankfurt book fairs which took place under imperial legislation. Emperor Rudolf II even issued a Mandat (1596) that gave preference to the protection of authors over publishers. Injunctions and substantial penalties were regularly enforced through the courts, though this tradition disappeared with the religious wars in central Europe (1618-48) (Pohlmann 1962).

In London, the Stationers were a minor London guild of writers, illuminators, bookbinders and booksellers, established since 1403. With the arrival of the printing press, booksellers and printers became the two dominant groups. Stationers obtained the right to print a new book by stating their claim before the Stationers' Company Warden. Because of the monopolistic control of the London printers, this amounted to a safeguard of the right to copy, though the practice had its roots (as in France) in censorship: registering a book at Stationers' Hall was necessary to legalise publishing.[6] The Stationers' Company royal charter of 5 May 1557 was an attempt by the Catholic Queen Mary to control the spread of heretical material:

> No person within this our realm of England or the dominions of the same shall practise or exercise by himself, or by his ministers, his servants or by any other person the art or mistress of printing any book or any thing for sale or traffic within this our realm of England or the dominions of the same, unless the same person at the time of his foresaid printing is or shall be one of the community of the foresaid mistress or art of Stationary of the foresaid City, or has therefore license of us or the heirs or successors of us the foresaid Queen by the letters patent of us or the heirs or successors of us the foresaid Queen. (Patterson 1968: 32)

In Saxony, central to the German book trade because of the annual Leipzig trade fair, a *Bücherkommission* governed by the Lutheran Church formally controlled the trade after 1687. Like the London Stationers, the Leipzig Books Commission had to provide a body for both censorship and regulation of reprint. It was composed of a councilor, a professor, a books inspector (i.e. a policeman), and a clerk all working under surveillance of the Kirchenrat, the local Lutheran Church board. The Books Commission had the power to order bans, confiscations or further investigations (Curtius 1831: 204ff. §1,505; cited in Kawohl 2002a: 276).

Until the end of the eighteenth century, authors (and composers) typically handed over their manuscripts against one single payment. John Dowland's wife, for example, received £20 from George Eastland for ownership of the manuscript and half the dedication reward of Dowland's Second Book of Songs or Ayres (1600) (Dowling 1932). The Stationers' Hall Book or Leipzig's Eintragsrolle provided a safeguard for publishers against other publishers; it provided no institutional recognition of authors' rights. In fact, when selling on manuscripts (which was soon commonplace: a significant trade had developed by 1700), publishers were utterly unconcerned about the authors.

A few exceptions are documented where authors began to assert themselves. They came to some written agreement, such as Thomas Ford who, upon registration of Musicke of Sundrie Kindes (13 March 1607), obtained the right 'that this copye shall never hereafter be printed agayne without the consent of master fford the Auctor' (Hunter 1986: 271). Alternatively, authors with access to the Crown could obtain a letter patent of monopoly protection, much like the earlier imperial practices of central Europe. In 1575, Elizabeth I granted twenty-one-year monopolies to Thomas Tallis (1505-85) and his pupil William Byrd (1543-1623) which coincided with the publication of their celebrated collection of thirty-four Cantiones Sacrae in the same year. Crown privileges sometimes conflicted with the interests of publishers, as in the case of George Wither who, after obtaining a letter patent for his Hymns and Songs of the Church (1623), took the Stationers' Company to court (Carlson 1966). Prominent beneficiaries of English Crown privileges include Handel, J. C. Bach and Thomas Arne. While some composers succeeded in exploiting these early institutional mechanisms, others remained firmly locked into restrictive relationships. Joseph Haydn's contract of employment with Prince Esterházy in 1761 still contained a clause forbidding the publication of his works (Tschmuck 2002: 214).

The old system of printing privileges and letters patent has been identified as a progenitor of modern copyright (Pohlmann 1962; Patterson 1968; Feather 1994). There are indeed striking similarities between privileges and copyright: both are granted by the legislator and serve as a means to protect printers, and sometimes authors, against competitors or unauthorised exploitation. However, there are important differences in practice, as well as in underlying rationale: unlike copyrights, privileges were not automatic and could be revoked; they could be granted both to printers of original books and to reprinters; and privileges would not extend past a state's border (cf. Dölemeyer and Klippel 1991: 191).

Apart from their role in censorship and raising revenue, Crown privileges were also an aspect of protectionist economic policies. While occasionally recognising individual creativity, they remained part of an absolutist and mercantilist framework. Thus their legitimation waned with the decline of these economic and political systems: in England at the end of the 1600s; on the European continent half a century later.

## From the Statute of Anne to the US Constitution

In 1690, John Locke proposed what would become known as the 'labour theory' of property. For our purposes Locke's theory may be summarised thus: in a state of nature, goods are held in common through a grant from God. 'Being given for the use of men, there must of necessity be a means to appropriate them some way or other, before they can be of any use or at all beneficial.' Every man has property in his own person: 'this nobody has a right to but himself. The "labour" of his body and "work" of his hands, we may say, is properly his.' If a person 'mixe[s] his labour' with a common good, it is converted into an exclusive 'private dominion'. Private appropriation, however, is limited by some provisos: one may only take as long as 'enough and as good' is left for others, and one may not appropriate so much that goods 'waste or spoil'. The first condition is akin to an equal opportunities provision; the second condition condemns waste as a diminution of the common stock of potential property.[7]

Lockean property thoughts have become part of the fabric of Western political expression. There are obvious resonances with contemporary corporate lobbying for intellectual property protection. We are familiar with the argument that 'creative effort' and/or 'investments' justify 'exclusive control' of the 'value added'. Natural rights are supposed to function as a constraint on political decision-making because they cannot be overruled or amended to achieve desirable social outcomes. Intellectual property as a Lockean right may remain outside the scope of regulation.

It is therefore remarkable that the first statutory copyright law conceived in a Lockean environment expressly refused to grant copyright as a natural right. The so-called Statute of Anne came into force on 10 April 1710 and protected 'Books and Other Writings' against reprints for fourteen years from first publication, renewable once.[8]

Politically, the Statute of Anne was a response to the lapse on 3 May 1695 of the Licensing Act of 1662, a censorship law introduced by the Restoration king, Charles II. The Licensing Act had been announced as 'An Act for Preventing Abuses in Printing Seditious, Treasonable and Unlicensed Books and Pamphlets, and for Regulating of Printing and Printing Presses', granting the Stationers' Company the power to seize, destroy and levy fines with the effect of consolidating the monopoly of the London Stationers as the only legitimate publisher of printed materials. By the 1690s, Parliament had noticed that stationers 'are empowered to hinder the printing [of] all innocent and useful Books', and that scholars were forced to buy classics and foreign books from the stationers 'at the extravagant Price they demand, but must content with their ill and incorrect Editions' (XI H. C. Jour.: 305-6, quoted in Patterson 1968: 139ff).

Table 1: Statute of Anne (1709/10) for the Encouragement of Learning  

<table><tr><td>Protected Subject Matter</td><td>Owner</td><td>Criteria for Protection</td><td>Exclusive Rights</td><td>Term</td><td>Registration</td></tr><tr><td>‘Books and other Writings’(s.1)</td><td>‘Authors or Purchasers’ (preamble &amp; s.1)</td><td>silent; s.1 suggests (emphasis added): ‘for the Encourage-ment of learned Men to compose and write useful Books’</td><td>‘print, reprint, or import, or cause to be printed, reprinted or imported’ sell, publish or expose to Sale’(s.1)</td><td>14 years from publication date (s.1) after expiry ‘sole Right of printing or disposing of Copies’ returns to author for second term of 14 years (s.11)</td><td>‘Register Book of the Company of Stationers’ kept at Stationers’ Hall (s.2)</td></tr></table>

The Statute of Anne replaced the Stationers' Company's perpetual prerogative with a statutory but limited monopoly open to all 'Authors or Purchasers'. The Act was constructed as a regulation of the book trade for

the public interest, and the original Lockean preamble, referring to 'the undoubted property' that authors had in their books as 'the product of their learning and labour' was scrapped during parliamentary reading (Rose 1993: 45). The new preamble suggests 'An Act for the Encouragement of Learning'. 'Learned Men' would now be encouraged to 'compose and write useful Books' because the consent of 'Authors or Proprietors' would be required for the printing, reprinting, sale and publication of their work (s. 1). The wording remains ambiguous as to where the incentive should bite precisely: at the point of creation (author) or investment in publication and distribution (proprietor).

Music was not thought to be protected under the Statute of Anne but although unauthorised publication of a composer's work was therefore not illegal, accusations of piracy still flew between music publishers. For example, three editions of Corelli's Twelve Sonatas Op. 5 were available in London around 1700: the Rome edition imported by Banister and King, Roger's Amsterdam edition sold by Francis Vaillant, and Walsh's, copied from the Rome edition. Roger and Walsh tried to compete on authenticity, citing corrections by various Italian musicians associated with Corelli. The composer would not have seen any financial benefits from these activities (Hunter 1986; Rasch 2002). Interestingly, eighteenth-century music publishers, unlike their book selling colleagues, did not lobby for statutory protection. 'For music publishers, the maintenance of copyright protection over 14 or 28 years was unnecessary, as most musical works would not remain in fashion that long' (Hunter 1986: 276). It appears that the control of distribution channels and predatory pricing against new entrants was as effective a means of market dominance as statutory protection. Copyright law cannot be evaluated independently of economic behaviour.[9]

The two most important copyright cases of the eighteenth century were the King's Bench decision in Millar v. Taylor (1769), in which an author's perpetual right in common law was asserted on the basis of Lockean arguments; and Donaldson v. Becket (1774), in which the House of Lords upheld the public interest aims of the Statute of Anne. Overturning Millar v. Taylor, Donaldson v. Becket exposed copyright as created and limited by statute. These cases influenced the development of both American and European copyright law, articulating many of the concepts in which copyright is still discussed today. They warrant a closer look.

In Millar v. Taylor (1769; also Burrow 1773), Robert Taylor, a printer from Berwick, had published an edition of The Seasons by James Thomson which Andrew Millar, a London bookseller, had purchased from the author in 1729. Thomson died in 1748, and it was evident that

the (once renewable) fourteen year term of the Statute of Anne must have expired when the case was brought in 1767. Millar argued that there existed a perpetual author right under common law, independently of the statutory provisions of the Statute of Anne. The King's Bench court, dominated by the eminent jurist William Murray (Lord Mansfield) who was involved in many of the early copyright cases, supported Millar's claim from first principles of property:

Because it is just, that an author should reap the pecuniary profits of his own ingenuity and labour. It is just, that another should not use his name, without his consent. It is fit, that he should judge when to publish, or whether he ever will publish. It is fit he should not only choose the time, but the manner of publication; how many; what volume; what print. It is fit, he should choose to whose care he will trust the accuracy and correctness of the impression; in whose honesty he will confide, not to foist in additions; with other reasonings of the same effect.' (98 English Reports: 252)

Strangely, the court did not even consider why such an author right should be structured as property, transferable to a London bookseller in perpetuity. After all, Mansfield appears to argue for two kinds of author rights: (1) reward for labour; and (2) the right to protect an author's reputation by preserving the integrity and source of a work. These rights could have been provided independently of property interests (see final section below). Patterson has argued that Lord Mansfield's opinion in Millar v. Taylor prevented the development of a doctrine of author rights under common law independently of a publisher's exclusive property control. (1968, ch. 8; see also Patterson 1987). In doing so, Mansfield sowed the seeds for the modern misery of copyright, pace the Lords' decision in Donaldson.

Donaldson v. Becket (1774 also Burrow, 1774) is probably the most celebrated of all copyright cases. Reasserting the fourteen year term of the Statute of Anne, and perhaps abolishing the author's common law copyright, the case was eventually decided by a simple vote in the House of Lords. 'Thus the peers gave an answer to the literary-property question, but they did not provide a rationale.' (Rose 1993: 103). Unsurprisingly, Donaldson v. Becket has been interpreted and reinterpreted ever since. Debate is still raging today about which Lord/Judge/Act meant what (cf. Deazley 2003). The case was uniquely dramatic, enthralling the contemporary literary scene. People queued for admittance to the final hearing.

Alexander Donaldson was an Edinburgh bookseller who specialised in reprints of literary standards. In 1763, he had set up a shop in London where he sold his books at 30-50 per cent less than London prices (Rose

1993: 93). In 1768, Donaldson deliberately and provocatively brought out another edition of Thomson's The Seasons (the subject of the litigation in Miller v. Taylor). Upon Andrew Millar's death in 1768, Thomas Becket and fourteen stationers purchased the copyrights of Millar's estate at auction for £505 (13 June 1769). Donaldson was excluded from the sale. In November 1772, Becket and his partners obtained an injunction against Donaldson who was said to have sold several thousand copies of The Seasons printed in Edinburgh. Donaldson appealed to the House of Lords where the case was heard on 22 February 1774. Five questions were directed to the Lord Judges (98 English Reports 257-8) who answered as indicated below, though there remains, as already mentioned, considerable confusion as to the exact legal significance of these votes.[10]

1. Whether an author of a book or literary composition had at common law 'the sole right of first printing and publishing the same for sale,' and a right of action against a person printing, publishing, and selling without his consent. Held, yes by a vote of 10 to 1.  
2. If the author had such a right, did the law take it away upon his publishing the book or literary composition; and might any person thereafter be free to reprint and sell the work? Held, no by a vote of 7 to 4.  
3. Assuming the right of common law, was it taken away by the Statute of Anne, and is an author limited to the terms and conditions of that statute for his remedy? Held, yes by a vote 6 to 5.  
4. Whether an author of any literary composition and his assigns have the sole right of printing and publishing the same in perpetuity by the common law? Held, yes by a vote of 7 to 4.  
5. Whether this right was restrained or taken away by the Statute of Anne? Held, yes by a vote of 6 to 5.

The first three questions refer to the rights of the author, the latter two were phrased in terms of 'the author and his assigns', the language of the Statute of Anne and, in practice, the rights of the booksellers. Following the decision in *Donaldson*, copyright was again a right created and limited by statute, not a source of income for the London stationers under the veil of perpetual author interests exercised by assigned proprietors.

The notion of copyright as a regulation for the benefit of the public, incentivising creative production, was most emphatically adopted by the United States. The US Constitutional Convention convened from May until September 1787. On 5 September, the copyright clause was agreed without debate. Congress should be empowered 'To promote the Progress of Science and the useful Arts, by securing for limited Times, to Authors and Inventors, the exclusive Right to their respective Writings and Discoveries' (Art. I, s. 8, cl. 8).

The first federal Copyright Act was passed in 1790: 'An act for the encouragement of learning, by securing the copies of maps, charts, and books, to the authors and proprietors of such copies, during the times therein mentioned.' It was closely modelled on the Statute of Anne in its utilitarian rationale, limited fourteen-year term (renewable once), registration requirement, and the restriction of specified acts of 'printing, reprinting, publishing and vending'.[^2-11] Particularly interesting is section 5 which encourages pirating of foreign works as:

nothing in this act shall be construed to extend to prohibit the importation or vending, reprinting, or publishing within the United States, of any map, chart, book or books, written, printed, or published by any person not a citizen of the United States, in foreign parts or places without the jurisdiction of the United States.

The public interest is clearly articulated as the national interest of a young nation, benefiting from the quick and cheap dissemination of the latest foreign advances in scientific and cultural thinking. The 1831 Copyright Act extends this prescription: one may import from abroad any kind of work without exception.

In Wheaton v. Peters (1832), the leading case of early American copyright law, the US Supreme Court denied that there was any author's right in common law (after publication) independent of the copyright statute. In the language of the court, copyright is a limited statutory grant of a monopoly which benefits the author in order to satisfy the public interest in learning. US copyright law remained steadfastly utilitarian until well into the twentieth century. The Congress Report accompanying the 1909 Copyright Act still argues that the legislation 'is not based upon any natural right that the author has in his writings . . . but upon the ground that the welfare of the public will be served'.[^2-12]

Most contemporary observers believed that the House of Lords in Donaldson had taken away the author's common law right upon publication, and replaced it with a limited copyright granted by statute for the public's benefit. As we shall see, though, it was later thought that Donaldson did admit an underlying natural common law right (cf. Rose 1993; Deazley 2003). Copyright's utilitarian rationale was thus replaced with a broader concept, whose term and scope was derived from arguments about the author. The following section argues that this nineteenth-century reinterpretation owes much to philosophical developments in German Idealism.

## Kant - Fichte - Hegel: The author arrives

Early print regulations – the statutes of booksellers' guilds, Crown privileges – were underpinned by collective structures. Copyright, on the other hand, is based on claims of individuals. Within eighteenth- and nineteenth-century discussions, those individual claims were most easily justified via the concept of property. As an English pamphlet of 1747 claimed:

For that the Product of the Mind is as well capable of becoming Property, as that of the Hand, is evident from hence, that it hath in it those two essential Conditions, which, by the allowance of all Writers of Law, make things susceptible of Property; namely common Utility, and a Capacity of having its Possession ascertained.' (William Warburton, A Letter from an Author to a Member of Parliament Concerning Literary Property, quoted in Rose 1993: 72)

Despite Warburton's optimism, it was not straightforward to support copyright as a form of property under the then prevailing Roman law tradition of absolute ownership of land and movable things. The Roman law obsession with occupancy as the source of all property claims is still reflected in Locke's approach where the undoubted possession of one's own labour is converted into individual ownership of previously common goods.

In France, Denis Diderot experimented with a non-labour, genius-based theory of literary creation, ironically in a pamphlet commissioned by the Paris Guild which – in the Stationers' tradition – sought to establish a property title for printers via contracts with authors (1763, Lettre historique et politique adressée à un magistrat sur le commerce de la librairies). Diderot (who had translated some of John Locke's writings) rejected the Lockean notion that intellectual territory could be appropriated like land. For Diderot, an author's bond with a work is inviolable not because of the conversion of common into private goods but because of an act of first creation: 'what form of wealth could belong to a man, if not a work of the mind . . . if not his own thoughts . . . the most precious part of him, that will never perish, that will immortalize him' (quoted in Marshall 2001: 24).

Immanuel Kant's 1781 discussion Von der Unrechtmäßigkeit des Buchernachdrucks (of the illegality of reprinting) similarly derives copyright from the natural right of self-expression rather than from a property right of authors or publishers. According to Kant: 'in a book, conceived as a writing, the author speaks to his reader'. Thus the book as a physical entity is a mere 'tool to transfer a speech to the audience'. Following Kant, the Idealist philosopher, Johann Gottlieb Fichte, advanced what he deemed to be a proof that ascertaining intellectual possession was in fact possible via

the concept of form. In his 1792 article Beweis von der Unrechtmäßigkeit des Buchernachdrucks ('proof of the illegality of reprinting') Fichte identified the permanent feature of a book as 'the form of the thoughts', the result of a twofold abstraction: the intellectual part is abstracted from the physical part ('printed paper'); and within the intellectual part 'the form of the thoughts' is abstracted from the ideas. Hence there are three types of property in a book. The physical book as full property is completely at the owner's disposal. The ideas after being shared with the readers become a common property of the author and his readers. But the abstracted form necessarily remains the author's property, because it is 'physically impossible' to be appropriated by another person.

There is a tension in Fichte's theory between form as a property (proprium) of the work from which it is abstracted, and form referring to the process of formation rather than its result. This was addressed by Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel. Property for Hegel connects a person to his freedom; it is 'the manifestation of a personality' ('das Dasein der Personlichkeit', Hegel 1828, s. 51). Property becomes the foundation of a Philosophy of Right since, without property, a person is not conceivable at all. Hegel employed a twin concept of form (on the objective side) and formation (on the subjective side). Neither mere physical seizure nor mere symbolic marking of the property is an appropriate way to acquire property, but 'formation' is. Thus formation has in Hegel's theory a similar function to labour in Locke's. With respect to intellectual property, Hegel distinguishes between disposable things of 'external nature' and inalienable 'inner' capabilities. An author may sell the right to use a 'single production' of his intellectual capabilities for a 'restricted period'. After buying and reading a book, its ideas are indeed the property of the buyer. The buyer is in possession of the 'capability to express himself in exactly this way'. But this capability can never be his property, since it remains with the author.

The perpetual bond between an author and his work in Fichte's and Hegel's theories was combined with the Kantian 'right of expression' in Eduard Gans' justification of performance rights. Gans, a Hegel follower and professor of law at Berlin University, was referring to theatre plays when he wrote in 1832:

In performances the author exposes himself to the risk of disapproval and thus the dramatic author should be able to decide every time anew to which public he presents his work. The opinion according to which a play once published may be performed on every stage, is wrong for two reasons, first, it allows someone to enrich oneself at another's expense and, secondly, it exposes someone to a danger, to which he possibly does not want to be exposed. (Gans 1832: 381)

Since that time, to use a work means not only to accept the authorship of a dramatist or a composer but also to recognise that everything ever done with the work is associated with the author's personality. Copyright concepts in German Idealism thus deviate from property concepts in the exclusive, transferable sense that Anglo-American liberalism derived via Locke from Roman law. Kant's concept of copyright was based on a person's right to express himself. In Fichte's and Hegel's theories, while an author's ownership of his intellectual creation provides the justification for copyright, this property is inalienable and thus, in an Anglo-American legal sense, not property at all.

## Abstract works: The road from Paris to Berne

We have so far identified the main justificatory avenues for individual copyrights developed during the eighteenth century: (1) the labour theory of property initiated by John Locke, expressed in the debates around the author's common law rights; (2) the utilitarian incentive to creative production, implicit in the Statute of Anne, reasserted in Donaldson v. Becket, and canonised in the Constitution of the United States; (3) the personality theory advanced within German Idealism.

The early nineteenth century saw a paradigm shift towards the concepts that characterise modern copyright law. Three features appear in seminal legislation such as the French revolutionary laws of 1791 and 1793; the Prussian Law of 1837; and Talfourd's Act (1842) in the UK:

1. The author becomes the source of protection. The term calculation shifted from the date of publication to the life of the author (including a post mortem allowance to cover the author's dependants).  
2. Protected subject matter extends beyond printed books to literary and artistic creations in a wide sense (including music). A threshold criterion of merit (i.e. originality) is introduced.  
3. Restricted acts refer to an abstract work identity rather than printed matter. Performing rights are introduced for dramatic and musical works; adaptations, such as excerpts or instrumental arrangements, and transcriptions of sermons and lectures become restricted as unauthorised derivatives.

This new conception of copyright has been recognised by many academic commentators as a crucial moment. Sherman and Bentley (1999: 2-6) date the transformation within the British tradition from what they call a 'pre-modern' to a 'modern' intellectual property law to 'the middle period of the 19th Century'. Authors within critical literary theory (Woodmansee 1984; Woodmansee and Jaszi 1994; Boyle 1996) and

the sociology of copyright (Marshall 2001) have associated this transformation with the emerging Romantic conception of the author around the turn of the nineteenth century. We offer a different account, emphasising a process of abstraction that has an important source in Idealist philosophical thought which fused in the early nineteenth century with the exclusive, transferable property concept that had developed in the liberal tradition (drawing on both on labour and utilitarian justifications).[^2-13]

The first copyright statutes that take their lead (in term and scope) from the author are the French revolutionary Acts of 1791 (regarding performances of theatre and musical drama) and 1793 (regarding the sale and dissemination of artistic works of any genre) which replaced the old system of publishers' rights. The Act of 19 January 1791 introduces for the first time a post mortem ownership of five years, while the famous decree of 19 July 1793 ('Declaration of the Rights of Genius') grants a general transferable life of author term (plus ten years). The philosophical basis of the French laws, however, is somewhat uncertain. On the one hand, we have expression-related justifications. As Le Chapelier put it in his famous speech introducing the decree (quoted in Davies 2002: 137): 'The most sacred, the most legislative, the most unassailable . . . the most personal of properties, is a work which is the fruit of the imagination of a writer.' On the other hand, there is a strong public interest undercurrent suspicious of exclusive control. Condorcet had argued in the 1776 pamphlet Fragments sur la liberté de la presse that literary property was not a natural individual right but 'founded in society itself' (quoted in Hesse 1991: 103). According to Hesse, the revolutionary laws represented copyright as a reward to the author as public servant, not as the Lockean property right of liberal individualism. Ginsburg (1990) suggests that early French copyright was indeed very similar to the Anglo-American tradition, with the courts regularly balancing the rights of the authors with the needs of the public.[14]

In the context of the argument advanced in this chapter, these early French author laws contain the first signs of rights granted without formalities (all privileges were abolished), and of rights granted for public performance. The imminent paradigm shift toward the protection of all instantiations of abstract works can be nicely illustrated with the changing protection afforded to music.

The Statute of Anne did not cater specifically for music, though case law developed classifying sheet music as 'writings' within the meaning of the Act. In the wake of Millar v. Taylor and Donaldson v. Becket, a test case was launched by Johann Christian Bach (the youngest son of J. S. Bach) and Carl Friedrich Abel, then at the height of their fame as organisers of a popular London concert series. The dispute concerned an

unauthorised edition of a Bach exercise and Sonata published by Longman & Lukey. On 18 March 1773, the case was brought in Chancery but it was only in 1777 that it was finally heard, again before Lord Chief Justice Mansfield. Cowper reported it thus (Small 1985):

Lord Mansfield called on Mr. Wood [attorney for the defendant] to begin; and without hearing Mr. Robinson [attorney for the plaintiff] in answer, said, the case was so clear and the arguments such, that it was difficult to speak seriously upon it. The words of the Act of Parliament are very large: 'books and other writings.' It is not confined to language or letters. Music is a science; it may be written; and the mode of conveying the ideas, is by signs and marks. A person may use the copy by playing it, but he has no right to rob the author of the profit, by multiplying copies and disposing of them for his own use. If the narrow interpretation contended for in the argument were to hold, it would equally apply to algebra, mathematics, arithmetic, hieroglyphics. All these are conveyed by signs and figures. There is no colour for saying that music is not within the Act. Afterwards, on Monday, June 16th, the Court certified in these words, 'Having heard counsel and considered the case, we are of the opinion, that a musical composition is a writing within the Statute of the 8th of Queen Anne'.

Note that protection was expressly confirmed only against 'multiplying copies' of printed material, while any 'person may use the copy by playing it'. There was thus no protection for the work itself whose identity was still uncertain!15

A favourite argument of publishers remained that they had acquired a copy legitimately. They thus denied that a musical work could be owned independently of what they were actually selling (that is, a copy of a manuscript of ostentatiously 'uncertain' authorship obtained from a third party). In J. C. Bach's second law suit (also filed in 1773, but probably settled out of court), the defendants Longman & Lukey admitted 'that the said three symphonys entitled as follows: Three symphonies in 8 parts for Violins Hoboys Horns Tenor and Bass were purchased from The Hague by [Dutch publisher] Hummell', this being a 'constant, uniform and well known custom and practice' (Allen-Russell 2002: 27).

The emerging modern regime of copyright (as epitomised by the Berne Convention) employs a new concept of an abstract authored work to which all acts of exploitation are related, be they publication, engraving, reprinting, recital, translation or arrangement. Previously, each of these activities was subject to its own separate regulation (or non-regulation) according to specific policy circumstances. We can trace the formation of the new regime in two important statutes of the early nineteenth century.

Legal historians consider the Prussian Act of 1837 as the most influential copyright Act in nineteenth-century Germany, integrating for the first time the various regulations of the publishing industries into a comprehensive Gesetz zum Schutze des Eigenthums an Werken der

Wissenschaft und der Kunst gegen Nachdruck und Nachbildung ('law for the protection of property in works of science and the arts from reprint and imitation'). The Prussian Act came into force on 11 June 1837, and was the first copyright law in Germany to employ an extensive concept of art including literature, music and the fine arts. It figured as the model for Germany's evolving federal laws.

Significantly, the drafters of the Prussian Copyright Act included the term 'property' in the title, referring to Fichte's concept (albeit without citing his name):

The buyer of a book gets by the purchase the physical property in his copy and the right to use and to process the expressed thoughts in his particular manner. What invariably remains the author's and can be identified as the real intellectual property [das eigentliche Geistes-Eigenthum], is the particular form, in which he has expressed his thoughts. These principles are not new, they already have been laid down in the 90s of the last century by learned men who made an effort, to develop the particular matter of reprint out of its own nature. (Philipsborn, preliminary paper to the Act, quoted in Wadle 1988: 65)

The Act was influenced by a sustained campaign led by Adolph Martin Schlesinger, Carl Maria von Weber's publisher and a leading figure in Prussia's musical establishment. Schlesinger resented unauthorised arrangements, in particular of Weber's blockbuster operas Der Freischütz (1821) and Oberon (1826), which were of great commercial value.[16]

In 1822, Schlesinger filed a complaint at the Berlin town court against a Freischütz piano arrangement of Viennese provenance that had been sold in Berlin book shops. The judge commissioned an expert opinion from the famous poet and composer E. T. A. Hoffmann. Hoffmann, a lawyer by training and a former Prussian civil servant, was asked whether the Viennese piano score was 'arranged along' Schlesinger's piano score. The Prussian statute book of 1794 (Allgemeines Landrecht) explicitly had included 'musical compositions' under the subjects protected against reprinting. However, Hoffmann argued that the specific sections for arrangements should not be applied to musical composition, because:

it is impossible to extract musical compositions in the same way, as it can be done with books. Reprint of a composition would only take place when an original would be 'reengraved' [nachgestochen] and reprinted identically with the original. (Kawohl 2002a: 269)

According to Hoffmann, Schlesinger's copyright did not involve the rights to an abstract work Der Freischütz; it was confined to the singular piano score version that he had published. The subject matter of

copyright was a work of print - a copper engraving. Hoffmann drew a comparison to works of art. A copper engraving showing a painting was not infringing a copyright in this painting. Another engraving of the same painting was an infringing copy of the first copper plate only if it was a counterdraw, but not if it was modelled on the original painting.

The key point of Hoffmann's argument was its denial of the abstraction which would soon be pervasive in European laws. Schlesinger's claim for damages was refused. Between 1821 and 1837, Schlesinger filed at least six complaints in Prussian courts and made repeated applications for an amendment of the arrangement rules of the Allgemeines Landrecht. He eventually saw success with the new copyright law of 1837. Here is a summary of its provisions.

Table 2: Prussian Act (1837) for the Protection of Property in Works of Scholarship and the Arts from Reprint and Reproduction  

<table><tr><td>Protected Subject Matter</td><td>Owner</td><td>Criteria for Protection</td><td>Exclusive Rights</td><td>Term</td><td>Registration</td></tr><tr><td>‘works of scholarship and art’ (preamble) writings (s.1) incl. books, yet unprinted manuscripts, lectures and sermons (s.3) geographical topographical scientific and architectural drawings (s.18) musical compositions (s.19) works of art (ss 21-3)</td><td>author and ‘those who derive their authority from the author’ (s.1, e.g. heir, publisher) transferable wholly or in part (s.9)</td><td>eigenthümlich (original) as criterion for non-infringing derivative works (s.20 and s.23) determined by committee of experts (s.17)</td><td>reprinting (s.2) publication, distribution (s.9) public performance prior to publication of dramatic and musical works (s.32) publication of transcribed lectures and sermons, (s.3) adaptation of musical compositions, (s.20) reproduction (Nachbildung) of copper engravings, lithographs (of works of art, s.29)</td><td>post mortem auctoris life plus 30 years (ss 5 and 6) works of arts 10 years pma (s.27) public performance 10 years pma, (s.32)</td><td>no formalities for works of literature and music works of art registered at the Ministry for Cultural Affairs (s.27) for translations: notice on title page for claim to produce within 2 years (s.4)</td></tr></table>

In Britain, the key legislation fusing author and property norms is the Copyright Act of 1842. By the early 1800s, the utilitarian rationale implicit in English copyright law since the Statute of Anne (1710), and sustained in the case of *Donaldson v. Becket* (1774) had become diluted. The House of Lords ruling in *Donaldson* was increasingly seen as a compromise between those who denied authors' rights altogether and those who asserted a perpetual property in the produce of labour. It was argued that even if perpetual copyright had been rejected, the author still had a natural right to his work. In this reading, the natural or common law right of the author and the statute became merged. In 1814, a revised statute extended the copyright term for the first time to life of the author (or twenty-eight years, whichever was longer).[17]

In 1837, the year of the new Prussian Act, a campaign was launched by Thomas Noon Talfourd, a member of parliament, lawyer, author and friend of leading figures of the Romantic literary scene. Several draft bills were submitted to Parliament supported by letters and petitions from William Wordsworth, Robert Southey, Thomas Carlyle and Hartley Coleridge. Their main aim was an extension of the copyright term to author's lifetime plus sixty years (while existing copyrights would revert to the author after twenty-eight years). The theoretical bases were new concepts of Romantic theory as well as the more traditional Lockean labour arguments. As Talfourd put it in a speech to Parliament: why should literary property not 'last as long as the works which contain truth and beauty live?' (Talfourd 1837: 8; quoted in Rose 1993: 111). Talfourd's disciple J. J. Lowndes wrote, in a supporting treatise:

For the object of the Bill is not to give greater value to the light and trivial productions of the day, which either reap a sufficient and quick reward from their admirers, or fall with well merited contempt into oblivion; but to secure to authors of genius and learning – whose works, although they become the classics of the country, often make their way but slowly into public favour – some slight pecuniary advantage, by extending their Copyright for a further period, at the very time it has commenced to be valuable, and to repay them for their long and unceasing labours. (Lowndes 1840: 101)

Talfourd's Bill reached the committee stage but not a final vote before the general election of 1841 in which Talfourd did not stand. A revised copyright Bill was passed early in the next Parliament, compromising on the post mortem term (now seven years  $pma$ ) while preserving Talfourd's structure. The Act of 1842 concentrates on books, but extends the right of 'representation or performance' to 'dramatic pieces' and 'musical com

positions'. The abstraction of authored works of art remains tentative, as reflected in ambiguous wordings about abridgements, anthologies, translations and dramatisations. All rights were subject to entry in the Book of Registry at Stationers' Hall, revealing a tension in the law: if the new rationale of copyright derived from the character of abstract, original, authored works (as opposed to the earlier incentive to the creation or dissemination of useful products), then its legal protection should coincide with the moment of creation not publication (Kawohl and Kretschmer 2003: 221).

Table 3: United Kingdom Copyright Act (1842)  

<table><tr><td>Protected Subject Matter</td><td>Owner</td><td>Criteria for Protection</td><td>Exclusive Rights</td><td>Term</td><td>Registration</td></tr><tr><td>‘books’, incl. ‘every volume, part or division of a volume, pamphlet, sheet of letterpress, sheet of music, map, chart, or plan separately published’ (s. 2) dramatic pieces and musical compositions, incl. ‘every tragedy, comedy, play, opera, farce, or other scenic, musical or dramatic entertainment’ (s. 2)</td><td>author or ‘assigns’ as personal property whether ‘derived from such author before or after the publication of any book’, by ‘sale, gift, bequest, or by operation of law’ (s. 2) publisher (if ‘projector’ or ‘conductor’ of ‘encyclopaedia, review, magazine, periodical work’) (s. 18)</td><td>[silent, preamble suggests (emphasis added) ‘literary works of lasting benefit to the world’]</td><td>‘print or cause to be printed, either for sale or exportation’ ‘import for sale or hire’ ‘sell, publish, or expose to sale or hire, or cause to be sold, published, or expose to sale or hire, or shall have in his possession, for sale or hire’ (s. 15) representing or performing musical and dramatic pieces (s. 20)</td><td>post mortem auctoris life plus 7 years, but at least 42 years from publication (s. 3)</td><td>‘Book of Registry’ kept at Stationers’ Hall (s. 11) ‘proprietorship in the copyright of books, and assignments thereof, and dramatic and musical pieces, whether in manuscript or otherwise, and licences affecting such copyright’ for dramatic and musical pieces in manuscript: registration only of title, name and place of author, name and place of proprietor, and time and place of first performance (s. 20)</td></tr></table>

The formation of modern copyright law was completed with the Berne Convention of 1886, elevating an international regime that took its term and scope from the creator, regardless of subsequent ownership or public policy implications. Led by Victor Hugo, a preliminary Congress on Literary and Artistic Property was held in Brussels in 1858 and adopted the following principles (quoted from Petri 2002: 116):

the author's ownership rights to his works of art and literature should be expressed in the laws of 'all civilised peoples';

all countries should recognise the same rights of non-nationals to their works as they do to works of their own citizens [the principle of national treatment];

copyright legislation in all countries should rest on a common foundation.

At the diplomatic conference in Berne in 1886, the principle of national treatment was established, but the minimum standards that applied regardless of national traditions remained quite weak.[18] Not until the Berlin conference of 1908 was it agreed that the rights granted under Berne should not be contingent on national formalities. The structure of the Berlin conference is still the bedrock of modern international copyright law. The US, for so long reluctant to follow the route to a *droit d'auteur*, eventually acceded to Berne in 1989 when the export interests of its copyright industries in Hollywood and Redmond became paramount. In 1994, the TRIPs Agreement (Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights: Article 9.1) incorporated the Berne standards into the World Trade Organisation (WTO). Any country that wishes to participate in global trade (by the latest count, the WTO has more than 140 members) must now enact exclusive transferable copyrights for more than a generation.

The minimum term of Berne has remained at author's life plus fifty years while Europe (with the 1993 Directive on harmonising the term of copyright protection) and the United States (with the 1998 Sonny Bono Copyright Extension Act) have adopted an extended term of seventy years post mortem auctoris. At the insistence of the US, the *droit moral* introduced with the Rome revisions (1928) of the Berne Convention was omitted from TRIPs: Article 6bis of the Rome revisions provided for the right to claim first authorship of a work (paternity right) and the right to object to any distortion, mutilation or other modification which would be prejudicial to the honour or reputation of the author (integrity right). The *droit moral* is distinct from copyright as an economic property right in that it cannot be transferred or waived. We shall argue in the next section that this distinction may be the way forward.

Below is a table summarising the structure of rights under Berne:

Table 4: Berne Convention (1886), Berlin revision (1908) for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works  

<table><tr><td>Protected Subject Matter</td><td>Owner</td><td>Criteria for Protection</td><td>Exclusive Rights</td><td>Term</td><td>Registration</td></tr><tr><td>literary and artistic works, including &#x27;every production in the literary, scientific and artistic domain&#x27; Art. 2)</td><td>Author (Art.1) [silent on successor in title]</td><td>original intellectual creation (not &#x27;news of the day&#x27; and &#x27;miscellaneous information&#x27; Art. 9)</td><td>translation (Art. 8) reproduction (Art. 9) public performance (Art. 11) indirect appropriations, incl. &#x27;adaptations, musical arrangements, novelisations, dramatisations&#x27; (Art. 12)</td><td>post mortem auctoris life plus 50 years (Art. 7)</td><td>the enjoyment and exercise of rights in respect of works &#x27;shall not be subject to any formality&#x27; (Art. 4)</td></tr></table>

## Whither now?

Ever since the eighteenth century Battle of the Booksellers, when Stationers evoked an absolute author's right that they had acquired (so they argued) via contract, the justifications for copyright have been extremely confused. Samuel Johnson's comments in 1773 (as reported by Boswell) neatly illustrate the different arguments:

There seems (he said) to be in authors a stronger right of property than that by occupancy; a metaphysical right, a right, as it were, of creation, which should from its nature be perpetual; but the consent of nations is against it, and indeed reason and the interests of learning are against it; for were it to be perpetual, no book, however useful, could be universally diffused amongst mankind, should the proprietor take it into his head to restrain circulation.[19]

The decision in *Donaldson v. Becket* (1774) did little to stem the tide that was transforming a sensible investment incentive into a generation-long burden on cultural activity, ostensibly under the guise of the author's original expression.

Private property can be defined negatively as the right to exclude. Access to property becomes conditional on the discretionary decision of the owner. Property entails the right to say no. It is widely accepted in (utilitarian)

economic theory that property rights are justified if they prevent a so-called 'tragedy of the commons' (Hardin 1968). For example, fish stocks held in common are liable to deplete because there is no individual owner who has an incentive in their preservation. (For further discussion of this argument see Chapter 3.) From a public interest perspective, though, property rights should not be more far-reaching than needed to achieve this welfare purpose. In the case of intellectual property, in particular, they should not encroach on others' 'freedom of expression' more than is necessary to give an incentive to creative expression and dissemination in the first place. Historically, however, this utilitarian perspective has been superseded by a second family of property justifications, stemming from John Locke's notion of men's 'natural' entitlement to the fruit of their labour, and from the Hegelian notion of rights as the 'manifestation of a personality'. The form and scope of acceptable rights under these premises is somewhat elusive. In particular, it is not clear how far other people's expression can be justifiably limited by such property claims.[20]

In this section, we shall finally bundle the concepts of creator and investor which, as we have seen, have formed an unholy alliance in the formation of modern copyright law. The argument is presented from premises that attempt to capture widely held views in modern societies (which echo some of the justificatory strategies discussed earlier).

Proposition 1: There is no unified category of right owners, covering creators (authors) and investors (producers).

Creators have four main interests:

1. to see their work widely reproduced and distributed  
2. to receive credit for it  
3. to earn a financial reward relative to the commercial value of the work  
4. to be able to engage creatively with other works (in adaptation, comment, sampling etc.).

Regarding the structure of author rights, this leads to three conclusions:

1. The creator has little to gain from exclusivity (it prevents widest distribution; it prevents access to other works; it does not ensure financial reward)  
2. The creator has little to gain from transferability (under normal contractual practices, particularly in the media, the creator will be bought out in a one-off commercial transaction)  
3. The creator has a lot to gain from the so-called *droit moral* (a kind of creative trade mark, ensuring integrity of origin).

In the past, authors' interests could only be met with considerable economic inefficiencies (mainly caused by the costs of administrating

rights). Digital technology offers new possibilities of tracing use and rewarding the creator. Transforming collecting societies into regulatory bodies answering to society at large (not only to rights owners) may be the best way forward (cf. Kretschmer 2002).

Proposition 2: Investors want exclusive and transferable property rights, to extract maximum returns from their investments. Exclusive rights, however, come at a cost to society.

1. Useful works become more expensive than they would have been (this is a direct consumer loss)  
2. Works become available for creative engagement only on the terms of the right holder (this means in practice a loss of cultural diversity, innovation and critique)  
3. Automatic returns from a back catalogue of works subsidise existing large right holders, creating an entry barrier to the creative industries (this is an anticompetitive effect).

Regarding the structure of copyright as a property right, this leads to one conclusion:

1. Investors should be granted exclusive terms of protection only as a response to market failure: that is, where without the incentive of exclusivity, a work in the 'useful arts' would not be produced and distributed at all.

The normal exploitation cycle of cultural products suggests that a short exclusive term would be sufficient. If the first statutory copyright, the Statute of Anne, granted a term of fourteen years (renewable once), the faster dissemination and exploitation environment of digital technologies would suggest an even shorter term. An extreme example of that rationale is the UK's first design copyright, the 1787 'Act for the Encouragement of Designing and Printing of Linens, Cottons, Calicos and Muslims'. It provided a producer head start of less than one season by granting an exclusive right to print and reprint for two months; in 1794, the term was extended to three months (Sherman and Bently 1999: 63).

## Star creators

Many creators have demanded control over their artistic output which, they say, can only be ensured through exclusive rights. In commercial practice, however, artistic control is only available to a few star creators whose bargaining power is sufficient to benefit from the exclusivity and transferability of rights (see Chapter 4). Only the interests of star creators

are similar to investor interests. They benefit disproportionately from the current copyright system.

Figures provided in the 1996 UK Monopolies and Mergers Commission Report on the British Performing Right Society (PRS) show that 80 per cent of author members earned less than £1000 from performance royalties for 1993; and that 10 per cent of authors received 90 per cent of the total distribution. Similarly, according to German music copyright society GEMA's yearbook for 1996-7, 5 per cent of members received 60 per cent of the total distribution. We have calculated that in both Germany and the UK between 500 and 1,500 composers can live substantially off copyright royalties. There are indications that such winner-take-all markets are prevalent in most cultural industries. For the US, Tebbel claimed in a 1976 study that only 300 self-employed writers could live off the copyright system (Tebbel 1976). For 90 per cent of authors, the copyright system did not provide a sufficient reward. The creative base of a modern society is supported by other means.

Early in their careers, many creators wish to become known by all available means, including being copied without permission. Piracy is welcome if source credits are given. Once creators have become famous, they typically perform a U-turn. Their monetary interests suddenly compete with investors' interests, aligning both in their defence of exclusive rights. 'Take a stand for creativity. Take a stand for copyright.'[^2-21] implored a petition to the European Parliament signed by 400 recording artists in 1999. 'We make our living through our music. The music that we create touches the lives of millions of people all over the world. Our creativity and our success depend on strong copyright protection. We now need your help.'[^2-21] This dubious harmony of interests remains the official industry line in its piracy campaign: 'Ultimately, if creators do not get paid, you will not get music' (John Kennedy, president and chief operating officer, Universal Music International, Letter to the Financial Times, 23 January 2003).[^2-22]

We believe that despite such rhetoric we are reaching the end of the period of copyright expansion traced in this chapter. Within a generation, copyright laws will be unrecognisable, abandoning the Berne paradigm. The history of copyright supports arguments for a system in which short terms of exclusivity, encouraging fast exploitation, are followed by a remuneration right for the lifetime of the creator. As the following chapters in this book demonstrate, copyright practice is already changing, as, in their various ways, bootleggers, DJs, samplers, consumers and performance artists invent new forms of cultural engagement. Copyright law must eventually follow.

## Notes

[^2-1]: This chapter draws on the following previously published research: Kretschmer (2000); Kawohl (2001); Kawohl (2002a); Kawohl and Kretschmer (2003); and Kretschmer (2003).  

[^2-2]: In the law and economics literature (Maughan 2001), two further features of property rights are identified: universality (that is, a complete set of property relationships between all parties is specified) and enforceability (that is, the rights are stable and can be reliably asserted).  

[^2-3]: 'Piracy' in its literal meaning asserts extraterritorial jurisdiction over robbery on the sea. The Oxford English Dictionary traces this use back to 1552. Piracy as 'infringement of right conferred by a patent or copyright' is first referenced in 1771. An early example of its use in court with reference to music is in D'Almaine v. Boosey (1834): 'To publish, in the form of quadrilles and waltzes, the air's of an opera of which there exists an exclusive copyright, is an act of piracy' (quoted in McFarlane 1986).  

[^2-4]: It should be noted that the prescription that you should not appropriate what is not yours does not presuppose a conception of copyright as individual exclusive property. Unauthorized non-commercial use that acknowledges its source may be consistent with the Eighth Commandment.  

[^2-5]: The orthodox expression of this argument is in Landes and Posner (1989).  

[^2-6]: The first systematic regime of printing privileges as a means of censorship was installed in France in 1521. Under the 1723 Code de la Librarie, the book trade was still regulated via the Paris Guild, supporting perpetual monopolies (Hesse 1991).  

[^2-7]: The authoritative text of Locke's Two Treatises of Government is the third edition of 1698. The quotes are all from Chapter 5. In recent political philosophy, there has been much debate about the interpretation and scope of the Lockean proviso. For good discussions in the context of intellectual property, see Hughes (1988); Hettinger (1989); Drahos (1996); Shiffrin (2001); Fisher (2001).  

[^2-8]: In the literature, the Statute of Anne is variously cited with the years 1709 (the year it was enacted: this is today the usual way of citing Statutes) and 1710 (the year it came into force). Note that English legislation at the time referred to the year of reign of the monarch ("The Statute of the 8th of Queen Anne"), which does not coincide with the modern calendar year. 

[^2-9]: A graphic illustration of the competitive practices of eighteenth-century music publishing in England is provided in the autobiography (1803) of Charles Dibdin (1745-1814), a composer of highly successful popular songs. When Dibdin resorted to self-publishing in 1790 in order to increase the lowly returns offered by the established publishing houses, 'the music-shops discouraged their sale . . . [and I] began, as usual, to feel their power, and my own incapacity to struggle against it . . . I had scarcely opened my shop, when the clamours, among the music-sellers, became universal . . . Some of these crotch-mongers made an open declaration that they would not sell any article in my catalogue' (quoted in Hunter 1986: 243). Avoiding London's publishing oligopoly, Charles Dibdin toured the country with his music and survived. Here are contrasting figures of Dibdin's payments, before and after he opened his own business. In 1768, he received £45 for the music of The Padlock, the vocal score alone selling 10,000 copies in thirteen years. Another group of songs which Dibdin claims to have sold for £60, made the publisher £500. As a self-publisher, Dibdin sold 10,750 copies of the song Greenwich Pensioner, yielding profits of more than £400. In Germany, Georg Philipp Telemann (1681-1767) was the archetypal eighteenth-century musical entrepreneur. At the outset of his career, he was still forced into a feudal contract (1717), preventing the communication of new compositions beyond his court employer. From 1721, as music director of the independent merchant city of Hamburg, he pioneered many new exploitation techniques. Since it was unseemly to charge for church concerts, he 'ordered guards to the doors who prevented anybody from entering who had no printed copy of the Passion [performed]' (from Telemann's Autobiography in Mattheson 1740). In order to prevent unauthorised reprints of his works, Telemann invented a music magazine, serialising his compositions, publishing one movement at a time (Schleuning 1984).

[^2-10]: The law lords' vote was advisory and did not determine the outcome of the case. The decision for Donaldson was the result of (probably) a voice vote by all peers, which was supposedly quite conclusively in favour of a statutory right. The likelihood seems to be that the law lords voted just about in favour of a perpetual right, but this was ignored by the peers. There remains much controversy about whether the law lords definitively decided for a statutory right or whether this was a result of misreporting – an early example of how quickly copyright decisions get confused!  

[^2-11]: Not surprisingly 'maps' are mentioned in a prominent position. Unlike novels and scholarly books which were easily reprinted from imported English originals, maps of, say, West Virginia had to be supplied by domestic engravers and printers. In England maps had qualified as copyrightable subject matter not many years earlier, in the Engraving Copyright Act 1766. Since maps and sea charts necessarily resemble one another in form, the more so as they accurately represent the reality, a threshold of originality could not easily be defined. Lord Mansfield in Sayre v. Moore (1785) admitted, 'whoever has it in his intention to publish a chart may take advantage of all prior publications', but acknowledged the claimant's correction of some soundings and (new) application of the Mercator principle. Copyright in maps could only be justified within a utilitarian rather than a natural author's rights framework. Thus the turn from a utilitarian towards a author's right based copyright can be identified in a 'shift of categories': As Lord Justice Sir W. M. James, clarified in Stannard v. Lee (1871): 'Formerly maps had been considered artistic works, now they were to be brought into their proper place as literary works. And rightly so, in my opinion, for maps are intended to give information in the same way as a book does' (see Kawohl 2002b).

[^2-12]: By the late twentieth century, the utilitarian rationale of US copyright had succumbed to the lobbying efforts of increasingly powerful multinational right holders, most dramatically with the 1998 Sonny Bono Act, which extended the US copyright term by twenty years to life plus seventy years (or ninety-five years for works 'for hire'). The bill was sponsored by Congressmen who received significant campaign contributions from Disney. In the Supreme Court challenge of the Act (2003), an amici curiae brief by a group of economists, including five Nobel laureates, suggested that a copyright term of life plus seventy years provided 99.99 per cent of the value of protection in perpetuity; that is, virtually perpetual copyright economically speaking. It is evident that a retrospective extension to the term of copyright restricts public access whilst not providing any additional incentive to cultural production. Still, the majority of judges (7:2 votes) refused to rule against the extension on the grounds that the court could not challenge the powers of Congress in a matter of policy. One of the two dissenting judges advanced a more principled constitutional analysis: 'This statute will cause serious expression-related harm. It will likely restrict traditional dissemination of copyrighted works. It will likely inhibit new forms of dissemination through the use of new technology. It threatens to interfere with efforts to preserve our Nation's historical and cultural heritage and efforts to use that heritage, say, to educate our Nation's children. It is easy to understand how the statute might benefit the private financial interests of corporations or heirs who own existing copyrights. But I cannot find any constitutionally legitimate, copyright-related way in which the statute will benefit the public' (Breyer, J., dissenting, at 26). See also Breyer 1970.  

[^2-13]: For modern 'rule-utilitarians', the inviolability of property rights may itself be justified from the outcomes of such a system. This line of thinking goes back to Jeremy Bentham who remarked that: 'a state cannot grow rich except by an inviolate respect for property' (quoted in Drahos 1996, ch. 9). 

[^2-14]: Compare Louis XVI's letter to his government (1776): 'Every effort should be made to deal, as soon as possible, with the requests of the Parisian and provincial publishing houses regarding ownership rights to works and the duration of privileges. A large number of authors have made representations to me to this effect, and I realize the matter is one close to the heart of scholars . . . to an author, a privilege is the fruits of his labour, to a publisher a guarantee against costs . . . The author should be given precedence, and assuming the publisher's share stands in proportion to his expenses and he is able to return a reasonable profit, he should have no cause to complain' (Dock 1963: 127; quoted in Petri 2002: 62ff). The king's intervention led to a rejection of publisher's rights beyond the lifetime of the author.

[^2-15]: The Prussian Allgemeines Landrecht (1794, 1.11§ 997) had listed musical compositions alongside maps and copper engravings (Wadle 1998: 176), and a publishers' petition (Duncker 1834) to the federal assembly (Bundesversammlung) mentions musical compositions after mathematical schedules but before maps. The official commentary on the copyright Act of the German state of Saxony still stated in 1844: 'Musical compositions do not belong to the category of products of literature because the means of representation are symbols, not script. They belong to the products of art, of the fine arts. The law is intended to protect works of fine art in addition to the products of literature' (Meinert 1844: 16). Composers probably formed the concept of a performing right as early as they conceived of publishing rights. In 1664, the German composer Heinrich Schütz stated in the preface to the printed edition of his Christmas Oratorio that performances could only take place with the author's consent (mit des Authoris Bewiligung). As a practical solution, he offered the orchestral parts separately against an additional fee (MGG 1966: 1,168). During the seventeenth century, a performance royalty system became common practice at the Paris theatres where monitoring constituted no serious problem. In 1791, Pierre-Augustin Beaumarchais instigated a bureau for collecting royalties for writers and composers of dramatic work (in 1829, this became the Société des Auteurs et Compositeurs Dramatiques, still active today). It was not until the early nineteenth century that the right to public performance became an indicator of the emerging concept of an abstract authored work. Publishers immediately took advantage of the ruling in *Bach v. Longman*, registering music at the Stationers' Company. Between 1770 and 1779, thirty-five scores were registered; during the last decade of the eighteenth century the figures reached 1,828 (from the transcription of the register of the Worshipful Company of Stationers, analysed by Krummel 1975, quoted from Hunter 1986: 281). Yet, Hunter argues, composers seem not to have won an immediate improvement in earnings. Litigation was generally conducted between publishers (see Coover 1985). Note that despite the nascent provisions of music copyright, composers continued to use entrepreneurial, non-copyright strategies to make a living. Until well into the nineteenth century, the most important sources of income for successful, independent composers were not publishing revenues but commissions, dedications and performances of new compositions. Handel and Mozart made their (changeable) fortunes through organising the performance of their own works, a commercial route closed to many lesser composers. Not much of the fortunes accumulated by publishers such as the Ballard dynasty in Paris, Breitkopf & Hartel in Leipzig, Artaria in Vienna, or London's father and son Walsh, reached the composers. John Walsh senior published Handel's first set of sonatas under a false Amsterdam imprint to avoid payments to the composer. After business relations were established, Handel received  $\mathcal{L}20 - \mathcal{L}30$  per opera or oratorio (Rasch 2002). John Walsh senior's estate amounted to £30,000 in 1736; his son left £40,000 thirty years later (Hunter 1986: 75).  

[^2-16]: Within two years of its first performance at the Berlin Royal Opera House, Der Freischütz had been performed for the fiftieth time. Apparently, 9,000 copies of his piano version were sold in only one year (Berlin had no more than 200,000 inhabitants at the time).  

[^2-17]: For a lucid discussion of this subsequent reinterpretation of Donaldson v Becket, see Rose 1993: 107ff.  

[^2-18]: First signatories were Germany, Belgium, Spain, France, Britain, Haiti, Liberia, Switzerland and Tunisia.  

[^2-19]: James Boswell, *Life of Johnson*, 1791; quoted in Rose 1993: 85. Johnson argued in favour of a term between sixty and 100 years (20 July 1763).  

[^2-20]: The tension is present in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948) which recognised in Article 27.(1) that 'Everyone has the right freely to participate in the cultural life of the community, to enjoy the arts and to share in scientific advancement and its benefits.' But Article 27.(2) reads: 'Everyone has the right to the protection of the moral and material interests resulting from any scientific, literary or artistic production of which he is the author.' For discussion, see Drahos (1999).  

[^2-21]: Petition 'Artists Unite for Strong Copyright', led by Jean Michel Jarre with the assistance of IFPI (19 January 1999), signed by among others Boyzone, the Corrs, Robbie Williams, Tom Jones, Eros Ramazotti, Mstislav Rostropovich, Barbara Hendricks, Die Fantastischen Vier, Aqua and Roxette. Note that Robbie Williams later declared that Internet music file sharing is 'great' (MIDEM music trade fair, Cannes, January 2003).  

[^2-22]: The German publishers' campaign against the copyright exception for teaching and scientific research (s. 52a) argued: 'If copies of books are free, nobody will buy originals. If nobody buys originals, nobody will publish books or journals. The result: If nobody publishes, Germany's thinkers will soon have to look for a different employment' (Advert Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, 31 March 2003).

## References

- Allen-Russell, A. von (2002), “‘For instruments not intended’: The second J. C. Bach lawsuit’, Music & Letters 83 (1): 3-29.  
- Boyle, J. (1996), Shamans, Software, and Spleens: Law and the Construction of the Information Society, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.  
- Breyer, S. (1970), 'The uneasy case for copyright', Harvard Law Review 84: 281-351.  
- Burrow, J. (1773), The Question Concerning Literary Property, Determined by the Court of King's Bench on 20th April, 1769, in the Cause Between Andrew Millar and Robert Taylor, London (reprinted in The Literary Property Debate: Six Tracts 1764-1774, ed. S. Parks, New York: Garland 1975).
- Burrow, J. (1774), The Cases of the Appellants and Respondents in the Cause of Literary Property, Before the House of Lords, London (reprinted in The Literary Property Debate: Six Tracts 1764-1774, ed. S. Parks, New York: Garland 1975).  
- Carlson, N. E. (1966), 'Wither and the Stationers', Studies in Bibliography xix: 210-15.  
- Coover, J. (ed.) (1985), Music Publishing, Copyright and Piracy in Victorian England, London: Mansell.  
- Curtius, K. F. (1831), Handbuch des im Königreiche Sachsen geltenden Civilrechts, vol. 4, 2nd edn, Leipzig: E. B. Schwickert.  
- Davies, G. (2002), Copyright and the Public Interest (2nd edn), London: Sweet & Maxwell.  
- Deazley, R. (2003), 'The myth of copyright at common law', Cambridge Law Journal 62 (1): 106-33.  
- Dock, M.-C. (1963), Etude sur le droit d'auteur, Paris: LGDJ.  
- Dolemeyer, B. and Klippel, D. (1991), 'Der Beitrag der deutschen Rechtswissenschaft zur Theorie des gewerblichen Rechtsschutzes und Urheberrechts', in Gewerbllicher Rechtsschutz und Urheberrecht in Deutschland. Festschrift zum Humbertjährigen Bestehen der Deutschen Vereinigung für Gewerblichen Rechtsschutz und Urheberrechtund ihrer Zeitschrift, vol. 2, F.-K. Beier, A. Kraft, G. Schricker and E. Wadle (eds), Weinheim, 185-240.  
- Donaldson v. Becket (1774), 2 Brown's Prerogative Cases 129, 1 English Reports 837.  
- Dowling, M. (1932), 'The Printing of John Dowland's Second Book of Songs or Ayres', The Library xii (4th series): 365-80.  
- Drahos, P. (1996), A Philosophy of Intellectual Property, Aldershot: Dartmouth.  
- Drahos, P. (1999), 'The universality of intellectual property rights: origins and developments', Geneva: WIPO.  
- Duncker, F. W. et al. (1834), Vorschläge zur Feststellung des literarischen Rechtszustandes in den Staaten des deutschen Bundes, in Acta des justizministeriums betreffend: das Nachdrucken der Bücher u.d.m. bis 1838, Geheimes Staatsarchiv Preußischer Kulturbesitz, HA.1, Rep 84 II 2 N, Nr.1, Bd.1, Bl.106.  
- Eisenstein, E. (1979), The Printing Press as an Agent of Change: Communications and Cultural Transformations in Early-Modern Europe, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  
- Feather, J. (1994), *Publishing, Piracy and Politics: A Historical Study of Copyright in Britain*, London: Mansell.  
- Fichte, J. G. (1792), 'Beweis von der Unrechtmäßigkeit des Buchernachdrucks. Ein Räsonnement und eine Fabel', Berliner Monatsschrift 21: 443-483; also in: I. H. Fichte (ed.), Fichte. Vermischte Schriften und Aufsätze, Berlin 1845/46, reprint Berlin 1971, 223-44.  
- Fisher, W. (2001), 'Theories of intellectual property', in S. R. Munzer (ed.), New Essays in the Legal and Political Theory of Property, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 168-99.
- Gans, E. (1832), 'Ueber das Recht zur Aufführung gedruckter Theaterstücke', in Beiträge zur Revision der Preußischen Gesetzgebung, ed. E. Gans, Berlin: Duncker and Humblot.  
- Ginsburg, J. C. (1990), 'A tale of two copyrights: literary property in revolutionary France and America', Tulane Law Review 64: 991-1,031.  
- Hardin, G. (1968), 'The tragedy of the commons', Science 162: 1,243-8.  
- Hegel, G. W. F. (1821-33), Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts, Berlin.  
- Hesse, C. (1991), *Publishing and Cultural Politics in Revolutionary Paris*, 1789-1810, Berkeley: University of California Press  
- Hettinger, E. C. (1989), 'Justifying intellectual property', *Philosophy and Public Affairs*, 18(1): 31-52.  
- Hughes, J. (1988), 'The Philosophy of intellectual property', *Georgetown Law Journal* 77: 287-366.  
- Hunter, D. (1986), 'Music copyright in Britain to 1800', *Music and Letters* 269-82.  
- Kant, I. (1785), 'Von der Unrechtmäßigkeit des Buchernachdrucks', Berliner Monatszeitschrift: 403-17; reprinted in UFITA (Archiv für Urheber-, Film-, Funk-, und Theaterrecht) 106 (1987): 137-44.  
- Kawohl, F. (2001), 'Examining a paradigm shift in intellectual property: music copyright around 1800', paper presented at symposium A New Feudalism of Ideas?, Centre for Intellectual Property Policy and Management, Bournemouth University (proceedings available at www.cippm.org.uk/symposium2001).  
- Kawohl, F. (2002a), Urheberrecht der Musik in Preußen 1820-1840, Tuting: Hans Schneider  
- Kawohl, F. (2002b), 'Maps and sheet music: hybrids between artistic and literary copyright', paper presented at conference Legal Frameworks: Intellectual Property and the Visual Arts, 3 October 2002, University of Copenhagen.  
- Kawohl, F. and Kretschmer, M. (2003), 'Abstraction and registration: conceptual innovations and supply effects in Prussian and British copyright (1820-50), Intellectual Property Quarterly 2: 209-28.  
- Kretschmer, M. (2000), 'Intellectual property in music: a historical analysis of rhetoric and institutional practices', special issue: 'Cultural Industry' (ed. P. Jeffcutt), Studies in Cultures, Organizations and Societies 6: 197-223.  
- Kretschmer, M. (2002), 'The failure of property rules in collective administration: rethinking copyright societies as regulatory instruments', European Intellectual Property Review (EIPR) 24/3: 126-37.  
- Kretschmer, M. (2003), 'Digital copyright: the end of an era', European Intellectual Property Review (EIPR) 25/8: 333-41.  
- Laddie, H. (1997), 'Copyright: over-strength, over-regulated, over-rated?', in 'Innovation, incentive and reward: intellectual property law and policy', David Hume Papers on Public Policy 5(1): 1-16.  
- Landes, N. and Posner, R. (1989), 'An economic analysis of copyright law', Journal of Legal Studies 18: 325-66.  
- Locke, J. (1690), Two Treatises of Government, London.
- Lowndes, J. J. (1840), An Historical Sketch of the Law of Copyright, London: Saunders and Benning.  
- Maughan, C. W. (2001), 'Property and intellectual property: foundations in law and economics', paper presented at symposium A New Feudalism of Ideas?, 26 June 2001, Centre for Intellectual Property Policy and Management, Bournemouth University (proceedings available at www.cippm.org.uk/symposium2001).  
- Marshall, L. (2001), *Losing One's Mind: Bootlegging and the Sociology of Copyright*, PhD thesis, University of Warwick.  
- Mattheson, J. (1740), Grundlage einer musicalischen Ehrenpforte, Hamburg.  
- McFarlane, G. (1986), Copyright through the Cases, London: Waterlow.  
- Meinert, F. W. (1844), Das Königlich Sächsische Gesetz vom 22. Februar 1844 zum Schutze der Rechte an litterarischen Erzeugnissen und Werken der Kunst, Leipzig.  
- MGG (1949-68), Musik in Geschichte und Gegenwart (music encyclopediaaedia), Kassel: Bärenreiter.  
- Millar V. Taylor (1769), 98 English Reports 92.  
- Munro, J. H. A. (2001), 'The "New Institutional Economics" and the changing fortunes of fairs in medieval and early modern Europe', Vierteljahrschrift für Soziat und Wirtschaftsgeschichte 88 (1): 1-47.  
- North, D. C. and Thomas, R. (1973), The Rise of the Western World: A New Economic History, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  
- Patterson, L. R. (1968), Copyright in Historical Perspective, Nashville: Vanderbilt University Press.  
- Patterson, L. R. (1987), 'Free speech, copyright, and fair use', Vanderbilt Law Review 40: 1-66.  
- Petri, G. (2002), TheComposer'sRight, Stockholm:Atlantis.  
- Pohlmann, H. (1962), Die Frühgeschichte des Musikalischen Urheberrechts (ca. 1400-1800) Neue Materialien zur Entwicklung des Urheberrechtsbewußteins der Komponisten, Kassel: Bärenreiter.  
- Püttingen, J. V. von (1864), Das musikalische Autorrecht, Wilhelm Braunmüller, Vienna; reprinted in UFITA (Archiv für Urheber-, Film, Funk-, und Theaterrecht) (2001): 137-277  
- Rasch, R. A. (2002), *Music Publishing in Europe 1600–1900* (ch. 1 'Basic Concepts'; ch. 6 'Publishers and Publishers'), Strasbourg: European Science Foundation (available at www.let.uu.nl/ ~ Rasch/personal/Musicpublishing.htm).  
- Rose, M. (1993), Authors and Owners: The Invention of Copyright, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.  
- Sayre v. Moore (1795), 1 East 351, K.B.  
- Sherman, B. and Bently, L. (1999), The Making of Modern Intellectual Property Law, The British Experience, 1760-1911, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
- Schleuning, P. (1984), Das 18. Jahrhundert: Der Bürger erhebt sich, Reinbek/Hamburg: Rowohlt.
- Shiffrin, S. V. (2001), 'Lockean arguments for private intellectual property', in S. R. Munzer (ed.), New Essays in the Legal and Political Theory of Property, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 138-67.  
- Small, J. (1985) 'J. C. Bach goes to law', Musical Times cxxvi: 526-9.  
- Stannard v. Lee (1871), 6 Ch App 346, 21, 22 March.  
- Talfourd, Th. N. (1837), A Speech Delivered by Thomas Noon Talfourd, Sergeant at Law, in the House of Commons, London.  
- Tebbel, J. (1976), 'The book business in the USA', in David Daiches and Anthony Thorby (eds), The Modern World: Reactions, vol. 3, London: Aldus Books.  
- Tschmuck, P. (2002), 'Creativity without copyright: music production in Vienna in the late eighteenth century', in Towse, R. (ed.) Copyright in the Cultural Industries, Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 210-20.  
- Wadle, E. (1988), 'Das preußische Urheberrechtsgesetz von 1837 im Spiegel seiner Vorgeschichte,' in R. Dittrich (ed.), Woher Kommt das Urheberrecht und wohin besteht es?, Vienna, pp. 55-98.  
- Wadle, E. (1998), 'Preußische Privilegien für Werke der Musik: ein Kapital aus der Frühzeit des Urheberrechts 1794-837', in M. J. M. Chiner and H. Schäffer (eds), Music und Recht: Symposium aus Anlauf des 60. Geburtstags von Prof. DDr. Detlev Merten, Berlin.  
- Wadle, E. (1999), 'Privilegienpraxis in Preußen', in: B. Dölemeyer und H. Mohnhaupt (eds), Das Privilegium im europäischen Vergleich, Vol. 2, Frankfurt a. M., pp. 335-62.  
- Wheaton v. Peters (1832), 29 Fed. Cas. 863.  
- Woodmansee, M. (1984), “The genius and the copyright: economic and legal conditions of the emergence of the ‘author’, Eighteenth-Century Studies 17: 425–48.  
- Woodmansee, M. and Jaszi, P. (eds) (1994), The Construction of Authorship: Textual Appropriation in Law and Literature, Durham: Duke University Press. 
- Woodmansee, M. (1994), The Author, Art, and the Market: Rereading the History of Aesthetics, New York: Columbia University Press.

# 